The Tragedy of Romeo and Juliet
THE PROLOGUE
[Enter Chorus.]
Chorus.Two households, both alike in dignity,1In fair Verona, where we lay our scene, From ancient grudge break to new mutiny, Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. From forth the fatal loins of these two foes A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life; Whose misadventured piteous overthrows Doth with their death bury their parents' strife. The fearful passage of their death-marked love, And the continuance of their parents' rage, Which, but their children's end, naught could remove, Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage; The which if you with patient ears attend, What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
[Exit.]
[ACT 1
Scene 1. Verona. A public place.]
Enter Sampson and Gregory, with swords and bucklers, of the house of Capulet.
Sampson.Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
Gregory.No, for then we should be colliers.
Sampson.I mean, and we be in choler, we'll draw.
Gregory.Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
Sampson.I strike quickly, being moved.
Gregory.But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Sampson.A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Gregory.To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand. Therefore, if thou art moved, thou run'st away.
Sampson.A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
1.1.s.d. bucklerssmall shields 1 carry coalsendure insults 2 collierscoal venders (this leads to puns on "choler" = anger, and "collar" = hang-man's noose) 3 andif 3 drawdraw swords 13 take the walltake the preferred place on the walk
Gregory.That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the wall.
Sampson.'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
Gregory.The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Sampson.'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought with the men, I will be civil with the maids—I will cut off their heads.
Gregory.The heads of the maids?
Sampson.Ay, the heads of the maids or their maiden-heads. Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Gregory.They must take it in sense that feel it.
Sampson.Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
Gregory.'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been Poor John. Draw thy tool! Here comes two of the house of Montagues.
Enter two other Servingmen[Abram and Balthasar].
Sampson.My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
Gregory.How? Turn thy back and run?
Sampson.Fear me not.
Gregory.No, marry. I fear thee!
15-16 weakest goes to the walli.e., is pushed to the rear 18 thrust to the wallassaulted against the wall 33 Poor Johnhake salted and dried (poor man's fare) 33 toolweapon (with bawdy innuendo) 39 marry(an interjection, from "By the Virgin Mary")
Sampson.Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Gregory.I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Sampson.Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is disgrace to them if they bear it.
Abram.Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Sampson.I do bite my thumb, sir.
Abram.Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Sampson.[Aside to Gregory] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Gregory.[Aside to Sampson] No.
Sampson.No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my thumb, sir.
Gregory.Do you quarrel, sir?
Abram.Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Sampson.But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as good a man as you.
Abram.No better.
Sampson.Well, sir.
Enter Benvolio.
Gregory.Say "better." Here comes one of my master's kinsmen.
Sampson.Yes, better, sir.
Abram.You lie.
Sampson.Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow. They fight.
40 take the law of our sideskeep ourselves in the right 44 bite my thumbi.e., make a gesture of contempt 65 swashingslashing
Benvolio.Part, fools! Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Enter Tybalt.
Tybalt.What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds? Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thy death.
Benvolio.I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword, Or manage it to part these men with me.
Tybalt.What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee. Have at thee, coward! [They fight.]
Enter[an Officer, and] three or four Citizens with clubs or partisans.
Officer.Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down! Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
Enter old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.
Capulet.What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
Lady Capulet.A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Capulet.My sword, I say! Old Montague is come And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
Enter old Montague and his Wife.
Montague.Thou villain Capulet!—Hold me not; let me go.
Lady Montague.Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
68 heartless hindscowardly rustics 75 bills, and partisansvarieties of halberd, a combination spear and battle-ax 81 spitedefiance
Enter Prince Escalus, with his Train.
Prince.Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, Profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel—Will they not hear? What, ho! You men, you beasts, That quench the fire of your pernicious rage With purple fountains issuing from your veins! On pain of torture, from those bloody hands Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground And hear the sentence of your movèd prince. Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word By thee, old Capulet, and Montague, Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets And made Verona's ancient citizens Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments To wield old partisans, in hands as old, Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate. If ever you disturb our streets again, Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. For this time all the rest depart away. You, Capulet, shall go along with me; And, Montague, come you this afternoon, To know our farther pleasure in this case, To old Freetown, our common judgment place. Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
Exeunt[all but Montague, his Wife, and Benvolio].
Montague.Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach? Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Benvolio.Here were the servants of your adversary And yours, close fighting ere I did approach. I drew to part them. In the instant came The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared; Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears, He swung about his head and cut the winds,
90 mistempered(1) ill-made (2) used with ill will 96 grave beseemingdignified and appropriate 98 cank'red . . . cank'redrusted malig- nant 107 new abroachnewly open
Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn. While we were interchanging thrusts and blows, Came more and more, and fought on part and part, Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Lady Montague.O, where is Romeo? Saw you him today? Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Benvolio.Madam, an hour before the worshiped sun Peered forth the golden window of the East, A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad; Where, underneath the grove of sycamore That westward rooteth from this city side, So early walking did I see your son. Towards him I made, but he was ware of me And stole into the covert of the wood. I, measuring his affections by my own, Which then most sought where most might not be found, Being one too many by my weary self, Pursued my humor not pursuing his, And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.
Montague.Many a morning hath he there been seen, With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew, Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs; But all so soon as the all-cheering sun Should in the farthest East begin to draw The shady curtains from Aurora's bed, Away from light steals home my heavy son And private in his chamber pens himself, Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out, And makes himself an artificial night.
115 withalthereby 117 on part and partsome on one side, some on another 127 wareaware 130 most sought . . . foundi.e., wanted most to be alone 132 Pursued . . . hisi.e., followed my own inclination by not inquiring into his mood 139 Auroragoddess of the dawn 140 heavymelancholy, moody
Black and portentous must this humor prove Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Benvolio.My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Montague.I neither know it nor can learn of him.
Benvolio.Have you importuned him by any means?
Montague.Both by myself and many other friends; But he, his own affections' counselor, Is to himself—I will not say how true—But to himself so secret and so close, So far from sounding and discovery, As is the bud bit with an envious worm Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air Or dedicate his beauty to the sun. Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow, We would as willingly give cure as know.
Enter Romeo.
Benvolio.See, where he comes. So please you step aside; I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Montague.I would thou wert so happy by thy stay To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
Exeunt[Montague and Wife].
Benvolio.Good morrow, cousin.
Romeo.Is the day so young?
Benvolio.But new struck nine.
Romeo.Ay me! Sad hours seem long. Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Benvolio.It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
144 humormood 153 So far from soundingso far from measuring the depth of his mood 154 enviousmalign 161 happylucky 162 true shrifti.e., Romeo's confession of the truth 163 morrowmorning
Romeo.Not having that which having makes them short.
Benvolio.In love?
Romeo.Out—
Benvolio.Of love?
Romeo.Out of her favor where I am in love.
Benvolio.Alas that love, so gentle in his view, Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Romeo.Alas that love, whose view is muffled still, Should without eyes see pathways to his will! Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here? Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all. Here's much to do with hate, but more with love. Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate, O anything, of nothing first created! O heavy lightness, serious vanity, Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms, Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health, Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is! This love feel I, that feel no love in this. Dost thou not laugh?
Benvolio.No, coz, I rather weep.
Romeo.Good heart, at what?
Benvolio.At thy good heart's oppression.
Romeo.Why, such is love's transgression. Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast, Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
172 gentle in his viewmild in appearance 174 muffled stillalways blindfolded 178 more with lovei.e., the combatants enjoyed their fight- ing 180 O anything, of nothing first created(Romeo here relates his own succession of witty paradoxes to the dogma that God created everything out of nothing) 186 cozcousin (relative) 190 Which . . .presti.e., which griefs you will increase by burdening my breastDoth add more grief to too much of mine own. Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs; Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes; Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears. What is it else? A madness most discreet, A choking gall, and a preserving sweet. Farewell, my coz.
Benvolio.Soft! I will go along. And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Romeo.Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here; This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
Benvolio.Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
Romeo.What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Benvolio.Groan? Why, no; But sadly tell me who.
Romeo.Bid a sick man in sadness make his will. Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill! In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
Benvolio.I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.
Romeo.A right good markman. And she's fair I love.
Benvolio.A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Romeo.Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit, And, in strong proof of chastity well armed, From Love's weak childish bow she lives un- charmed. She will not stay the siege of loving terms, Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
196 discreetdiscriminating 198 Softhold on 199 And ifif 202 insadnessin all seriousness 204 sadlyseriously 205 in sadness(1) in seriousness (2) in unhappiness at the prospect of death 210 fair marktarget easily seen 212 Dian's witthe cunning of Diana, huntress and goddess of chastity 213 prooftested power 215 staysubmit to 216 bideabide (put up with)
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold. O, she is rich in beauty; only poor That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
Benvolio.Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
Romeo.She hath, and in that sparing make huge waste; For beauty, starved with her severity, Cuts beauty off from all posterity. She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair, To merit bliss by making me despair. She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
Benvolio.Be ruled by me; forget to think of her.
Romeo.O, teach me how I should forget to think!
Benvolio.By giving liberty unto thine eyes. Examine other beauties.
Romeo.'Tis the way To call hers, exquisite, in question more. These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows, Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair. He that is strucken blind cannot forget The precious treasure of his eyesight lost. Show me a mistress that is passing fair: What doth her beauty serve but as a note Where I may read who passed that passing fair? Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Benvolio.I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
Exeunt.
219 with beauty dies her storei.e., she will leave no progeny to perpetuate her beauty 220 stillalways 225 merit blisswin heavenly bliss 232 To call hers . . . in questionto keep bringing her beauty to mind 238 notewritten reminder 241 I'll . . . debtI will teach you or else die trying
[Scene 2. A street.]
Enter Capulet, County Paris, and the Clown,[his Servant].
Capulet.But Montague is bound as well as I, In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think, For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Paris.Of honorable reckoning are you both, And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long. But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
Capulet.But saying o'er what I have said before: My child is yet a stranger in the world, She hath not seen the change of fourteen years; Let two more summers wither in their pride Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Paris.Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Capulet.And too soon marred are those so early made. Earth hath swallowèd all my hopes but she; She is the hopeful lady of my earth. But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart; My will to her consent is but a part. And she agreed, within her scope of choice Lies my consent and fair according voice. This night I hold an old accustomed feast, Whereto I have invited many a guest, Such as I love; and you among the store, One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
1.2.1 boundunder bond 4 reckoningreputation 14 hopeschildren 18 And she agreedif she agrees 18 within her scope of choiceamong those she favors 19 accordingagreeing 20 accustomedestab- lished by custom
At my poor house look to behold this night Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light. Such comfort as do lusty young men feel When well-appareled April on the heel Of limping Winter treads, even such delight Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see, And like her most whose merit most shall be; Which, on more view of many, mine, being one, May stand in number, though in reck'ning none. Come, go with me. [To Servant, giving him a paper] Go, sirrah, trudge about Through fair Verona; find those persons out Whose names are written there, and to them say My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Exit[with Paris].
Servant.Find them out whose names are written here? It is written that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
Enter Benvolio and Romeo.
Benvolio.Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning; One pain is less'ned by another's anguish; Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
25 Earth-treading starsi.e., young girls 29 fennelflowering herb 30 Inherithave 33 stand in numberconstitute one of the crowd 33 in reck'ning nonenot worth special consideration 34 sirrah(a term of familiar address) 37 staywait 39-41 shoemaker . . . netsi.e., one should stick to what one knows how to do (but the servant, being illiterate, reverses the proverbial expressions) 43 findunder- stand 44-45 In good timei.e., here come some learned ones 47 another's anguishthe pain of another 48 be holp by backwardturningbe helped by turning in the opposite direction
One desperate grief cures with another's languish. Take thou some new infection to thy eye, And the rank poison of the old will die.
Romeo.Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
Benvolio.For what, I pray thee?
Romeo.For your broken shin.
Benvolio.Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Romeo.Not mad, but bound more than a madman is; Shut up in prison, kept without my food, Whipped and tormented and—God-den, good fel- low.
Servant.God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
Romeo.Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Servant.Perhaps you have learned it without book. But, I pray, can you read anything you see?
Romeo.Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
Servant.Ye say honestly. Rest you merry.
Romeo.Stay, fellow; I can read. He reads the letter."Signior Martino and his wife and daughters; County Anselm and his beauteous sisters; The lady widow of Vitruvio; Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; Mine uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; My fair niece Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt; Lucio and the lively Helena." A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
Servant.Up.
53 brokenscratched 57 God-dengood evening (good afternoon) 62 if I know the letters and the languagei.e., if I already know what the writing says 63 Rest you merrymay God keep you merry
Romeo.Whither? To supper?
Servant.To our house.
Romeo.Whose house?
Servant.My master's.
Romeo.Indeed I should have asked you that before.
Servant.Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry. [Exit.]
Benvolio.At this same ancient feast of Capulet's Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves; With all the admirèd beauties of Verona. Go thither, and with unattainted eye Compare her face with some that I shall show, And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
Romeo.When the devout religion of mine eye Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires; And these, who, often drowned, could never die, Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars! One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Benvolio.Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by, Herself poised with herself in either eye; But in that crystal scales let there be weighed Your lady's love against some other maid That I will show you shining at this feast, And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
Romeo.I'll go along, no such sight to be shown, But to rejoice in splendor of mine own. [Exeunt.]
83 crush a cuphave a drink 85 ancientestablished by custom 88 unattaintedimpartial 94 Transparentobvious 98 poisedbalanced 99 crystal scalesi.e., Romeo's pair of eyes 102 scantscarcely 104 splendor of mine ownmy own lady's splendor
[Scene 3. A room in Capulet's house.]
Enter Capulet's Wife, and Nurse.
Lady Capulet.Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
Nurse.Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old, I bade her come. What, lamb! What, ladybird! God forbid, where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Enter Juliet.
Juliet.How now? Who calls?
Nurse.Your mother.
Juliet.Madam, I am here. What is your will?
Lady Capulet.This is the matter—Nurse, give leave awhile; We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again. I have rememb'red me; thou 's hear our counsel. Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Nurse.Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Lady Capulet.She's not fourteen.
Nurse.I'll lay fourteen of my teeth—And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four—She's not fourteen. How long is it now To Lammastide?
Lady Capulet.A fortnight and odd days.
1.3.3 What(an impatient call) 9 thou 'sthou shalt 13 teensorrow 15 LammastideAugust 1
Nurse.Even or odd, of all days in the year, Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen. Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!) Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God; She was too good for me. But, as I said, On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen; That shall she, marry; I remember it well. 'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years; And she was weaned (I never shall forget it), Of all the days of the year, upon that day; For I had then laid wormwood to my dug, Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall. My lord and you were then at Mantua. Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said, When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool, To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug! Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow, To bid me trudge. And since that time it is eleven years, For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood, She could have run and waddled all about; For even the day before, she broke her brow; And then my husband (God be with his soul! 'A was a merry man) took up the child. "Yea," quoth he, "dost thou fall upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit; Wilt thou not, Jule?" and, by my holidam, The pretty wretch left crying and said, "Ay." To see now how a jest shall come about! I warrant, and I should live a thousand years,
19 of an agethe same age 23 earthquake(see Introduction) 29 I dobear a braini.e., my mind is still good 32 tetchyirritable 33 Shake,quoth the dovehousei.e., the dovehouse (which the Nurse personifies) began to tremble 33 trowbelieve 36 high-lonealone 36 roodcross 40 'Ahe 43 holidamholy thing, relic
I never should forget it. "Wilt thou not, Jule?" quoth he, And, pretty fool, it stinted and said, "Ay."
Lady Capulet.Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
Nurse.Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh To think it should leave crying and say, "Ay." And yet, I warrant, it had upon it brow A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone; A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly. "Yea," quoth my husband, "fall'st upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age, Wilt thou not, Jule?" It stinted and said, "Ay."
Juliet.And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Nurse.Peace, I have done. God mark thee to His grace! Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed. And I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Lady Capulet.Marry, that "marry" is the very theme I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet, How stands your dispositions to be married?
Juliet.It is an honor that I dream not of.
Nurse.An honor? Were not I thine only nurse, I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.
Lady Capulet.Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you, Here in Verona, ladies of esteem, Are made already mothers. By my count, I was your mother much upon these years That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief: The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
48 stintedstopped 52 itits 63 Marryindeed 72 much upon these yearsthe same length of time
Nurse.A man, young lady! Lady, such a man As all the world—Why, he's a man of wax.
Lady Capulet.Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Nurse.Nay, he's a flower, in faith—a very flower.
Lady Capulet.What say you? Can you love the gentle- man? This night you shall behold him at our feast. Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face, And find delight writ there with beauty's pen; Examine every married lineament, And see how one another lends content; And what obscured in this fair volume lies Find written in the margent of his eyes. This precious book of love, this unbound lover, To beautify him only lacks a cover. The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride For fair without the fair within to hide. That book in many's eyes doth share the glory, That in gold clasps locks in the golden story; So shall you share all that he doth possess, By having him making yourself no less.
Nurse.No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men.
Lady Capulet.Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Juliet.I'll look to like, if looking liking move; But no more deep will I endart mine eye Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Enter Servingman.
Servingman.Madam, the guests are come, supper
76 man of waxman of perfect figure 83 married lineamentharmo- nious feature 84 one another lends contentall enhance one another 86 margentmarginal commentary 87 unbound(1) without cover (2) uncaught 88 only lacks a coveri.e., only a wife is lacking 89-90 Thefish . . . to hidei.e., the fair sea is made even fairer by hiding fair fish within it 96 like ofbe favorable to
served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you follow straight. [Exit.]
Lady Capulet.We follow thee. Juliet, the County stays.
Nurse.Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Exeunt.
[Scene 4. A street.]
Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six other Maskers; Torchbearers.
Romeo.What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse? Or shall we on without apology?
Benvolio.The date is out of such prolixity. We'll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf, Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath, Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper; Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke After the prompter, for our entrance; But, let them measure us by what they will, We'll measure them a measure and be gone.
Romeo.Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling. Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
102 the nurse cursedi.e., because she is not helping 103 to waitto serve 104 straightstraightway 105 the County staysthe Count is waiting 1.4.1 shall . . . excusei.e., shall we introduce ourselves with the customary prepared speech 3 date . . . prolixityi.e., such wordiness is out of fashion 4 hoodwinkedblindfolded 6 crowkeeperboy set to scare crows away 7 without-book prologuememorized speech 9 measurejudge 10 measure them a measuredance one dance with them
Mercutio.Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Romeo.Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
Mercutio.You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings And soar with them above a common bound.
Romeo.I am too sore enpiercèd with his shaft To soar with his light feathers; and so bound I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe. Under love's heavy burden do I sink.
Mercutio.And, to sink in it, should you burden love—Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Romeo.Is love a tender thing? It is too rough, Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Mercutio.If love be rough with you, be rough with love; Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down. Give me a case to put my visage in. A visor for a visor! What care I What curious eye doth quote deformities? Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Benvolio.Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in But every man betake him to his legs.
Romeo.A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels; For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase, I'll be a candleholder and look on;
18 bound(1) leap (2) limit 21 pitchheight (as in a falcon's soaring) 28 Prick love for prickingi.e., give love the spur in return 29-31 Give . . . deformitiesi.e., give me a bag for my mask. A mask for a mask. What do I care who notices my ugliness? 32 beetle browsbushy eyebrows (?) 32 blushbe red, i.e., be grotesque 34 betakehim to his legsbegin dancing 36 rushes(used for floor covering) 37 grandsire phraseold saying 38 candleholderattendant
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
Mercutio.Tut! Dun's the mouse, the constable's own word! If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stickest Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Romeo.Nay, that's not so.
Mercutio.I mean, sir, in delay We waste our lights in vain, like lights by day. Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Romeo.And we mean well in going to this masque, But 'tis no wit to go.
Mercutio.Why, may one ask?
Romeo.I dreamt a dream tonight.
Mercutio.And so did I.
Romeo.Well, what was yours?
Mercutio.That dreamers often lie.
Romeo.In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Mercutio.O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you. She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes In shape no bigger than an agate stone
39 The game . . . donei.e., I'll give up dancing, now that I have enjoyed it as much as I ever shall 40 Dun's . . . word(Mercutio puns on Romeo's last clause, saying in effect "You are not done [i.e., "dun": "dark," by extension, "silent"] but the mouse is, and it's time to be quiet) 41 Dun(a common name for a horse, used in an old game, "Dun is in the mire," in which the players try to haul a heavy log) 42 sir-reverencesave your reverence (an apologetic expression, used to introduce indelicate expressions; here used humorously with the word "love") 43 burn daylightdelay 45 lights(1) torches (2) mental faculties 47 thati.e., our good meaning 49 'tis no witit shows no discretion 50 tonightlast night 53 Queen MabFairy Queen (Celtic)
On the forefinger of an alderman, Drawn with a team of little atomies Over men's noses as they lie asleep; Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs, The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers; Her traces, of the smallest spider web; Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams; Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film; Her wagoner, a small gray-coated gnat, Not half so big as a round little worm Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid; Her chariot is an empty hazelnut, Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub, Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers. And in this state she gallops night by night Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love; On courtiers' knees, that dream on curtsies straight; O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees; O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream, Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues, Because their breath with sweetmeats tainted are. Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose, And then dreams he of smelling out a suit; And sometime comes she with a tithe pig's tail Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep, Then he dreams of another benefice. Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck, And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats, Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades, Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes, And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
57 atomiestiny creatures 59 spinnersspiders 63 filmfine filament of some kind 65-66 worm . . . maid(lazy maids were said to have worms breeding in their fingers) 68 joiner squirrel or old grub(both woodworkers and adept at hollowing out nuts) 70 statestately array 78 suiti.e., a petitioner, who may be induced to pay for the courtier's influence 79 tithe pigtenth pig (considered part of the parson's tithe) 81 beneficeincome, "living" 85 healthstoasts
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab That plats the manes of horses in the night And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs, Which once untangled much misfortune bodes. This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs, That presses them and learns them first to bear, Making them women of good carriage. This is she—
Romeo.Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace! Thou talk'st of nothing.
Mercutio.True, I talk of dreams; Which are the children of an idle brain, Begot of nothing but vain fantasy; Which is as thin of substance as the air, And more inconstant than the wind, who woos Even now the frozen bosom of the North And, being angered, puffs away from thence, Turning his side to the dew-dropping South.
Benvolio.This wind you talk of blows us from our- selves. Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Romeo.I fear, too early; for my mind misgives Some consequence yet hanging in the stars Shall bitterly begin his fearful date With this night's revels and expire the term Of a despisèd life, closed in my breast, By some vile forfeit of untimely death. But he that hath the steerage of my course Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
Benvolio.Strike, drum.
They march about the stage, and[retire to one side].
90 elflockshair tangled by elves 92 hagnightmare or incubus 94 carriage(1) posture (2) capacity for carrying children 98 fantasyfancy 107 consequencefuture event 108 dateduration (of the consequence or event) 109-11 expire . . . death(the event is personified here as one who deliberately lends in expectation that the borrower will have to forfeit at great loss)
[Scene 5. A hall in Capulet's house.]
Servingmen come forth with napkins.
First Servingman.Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He shift a trencher! He scrape a trencher!
Second Servingman.When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands, and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.
First Servingman.Away with the join-stools, remove the court cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Anthony, and Potpan!
Second Servingman.Ay, boy, ready.
First Servingman.You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.
Third Servingman.We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys! Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all. Exeunt.
Enter[Capulet, his Wife, Juliet, Tybalt, Nurse, and] all the Guests and Gentlewomen to the Maskers.
Capulet.Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes
1.5.s.d. (although for reference purposes this edition employs the con ventional post-Elizabethan divisions into scenes, the reader is reminded that they are merely editorial; in the quarto this stage direction is part of the preceding one) 2 trencherwooden plate 7 join-stoolsstools fitted together by a joiner 8 court cupboardsideboard, displaying plate 9 marchpanemarzipan, a confection made of sugar and almonds
Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you. Ah, my mistresses, which of you all Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty, She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now? Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day That I have worn a visor and could tell A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear, Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone. You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
Music plays, and they dance.
A hall, a hall! Give room! And foot it, girls. More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up, And quench the fire; the room is grown too hot. Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well. Nay, sit; nay, sit, good cousin Capulet; For you and I are past our dancing days. How long is't now since last yourself and I Were in a mask?
Second Capulet.By'r Lady, thirty years.
Capulet.What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much; 'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio, Come Pentecost as quickly as it will, Some five-and-twenty years, and then we masked.
Second Capulet.'Tis more, 'tis more. His son is elder, sir; His son is thirty.
Capulet.Will you tell me that? His son was but a ward two years ago.
Romeo.[To a Servingman] What lady's that which doth enrich the hand Of yonder knight?
Servingman.I know not, sir.
19 walk a boutdance a turn 21 denyrefuse 21 makes daintyseems to hesitate 28 A hallclear the floor 31 unlooked-for sport(they had not expected maskers) 42 wardminor
Romeo.O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night As a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear—Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear! So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows. The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand And, touching hers, make blessèd my rude hand. Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight! For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Tybalt.This, by his voice, should be a Montague. Fetch me my rapier, boy. What! Dares the slave Come hither, covered with an antic face, To fleer and scorn at our solemnity? Now, by the stock and honor of my kin, To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Capulet.Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Tybalt.Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe, A villain, that is hither come in spite To scorn at our solemnity this night.
Capulet.Young Romeo is it?
Tybalt.'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Capulet.Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone. 'A bears him like a portly gentleman, And, to say truth, Verona brags of him To be a virtuous and well-governed youth. I would not for the wealth of all this town Here in my house do him disparagement. Therefore be patient; take no note of him. It is my will, the which if thou respect, Show a fair presence and put off these frowns, An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
Tybalt.It fits when such a villain is a guest.
53 ruderough 58 antic facefantastic mask 59 fleerjeer 64 in spiteinsultingly 68 portlyof good deportment
I'll not endure him.
Capulet.He shall be endured. What, goodman boy! I say he shall. Go to! Am I the master here, or you? Go to! You'll not endure him, God shall mend my soul! You'll make a mutiny among my guests! You will set cock-a-hoop. You'll be the man!
Tybalt.Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
Capulet.Go to, go to! You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed? This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what. You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time—Well said, my hearts!—You are a princox—go! Be quiet, or—More light, more light!—For shame! I'll make you quiet. What!—Cheerly, my hearts!
Tybalt.Patience perforce with willful choler meeting Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting. I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall, Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall. Exit.
Romeo.If I profane with my unworthiest hand This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this: My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Juliet.Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, Which mannerly devotion shows in this; For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
79 goodman(a term applied to someone below the rank of gentleman) 79 Go to(impatient exclamation) 81 God shall mend my soul(roughly equivalent to our "Indeed") 82 mutinydisturbance 83 set cock-a-hoopbe cock of the walk 86 scathehurt, harm 88 princoximpertinent youngster 91 Patience perforceenforced self-control 91 choleranger 95 If(here begins an English, or Shakespearean, sonnet) 96 shrinei.e., Juliet's hand 96 the gentle sin is thisthis is the sin of well-bred people 102 palmerreligious pilgrim (the term originally signified one who carried a palm branch; here it is used as a pun meaning one who holds another's hand)
Romeo.Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Juliet.Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
Romeo.O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do! They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Juliet.Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Romeo.Then move not while my prayer's effect I take. Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purged.
[Kisses her.]
Juliet.Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Romeo.Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urged! Give me my sin again. [Kisses her.]
Juliet.You kiss by th' book.
Nurse.Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Romeo.What is her mother?
Nurse.Marry, bachelor, Her mother is the lady of the house, And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous. I nursed her daughter that you talked withal. I tell you, he that can lay hold of her Shall have the chinks.
Romeo.Is she a Capulet? O dear account! My life is my foe's debt.
Benvolio.Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
Romeo.Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Capulet.Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone; We have a trifling foolish banquet towards. Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
107 do not move(1) do not initiate action (2) stand still 112 kiss by th' booki.e., you take my words literally to get more kisses 117 withalwith 119 the chinksplenty of money 120 My life is my foe's debtmy foe now owns my life 124 towardsin preparation 125 Is it e'en so?(the maskers insist on leaving)
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night. More torches here! Come on then; let's to bed. Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late; I'll to my rest. [Exeunt all but Juliet and Nurse.]
Juliet.Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Nurse.The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Juliet.What's he that now is going out of door?
Nurse.Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Juliet.What's he that follows here, that would not dance?
Nurse.I know not.
Juliet.Go ask his name.—If he is marrièd, My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Nurse.His name is Romeo, and a Montague, The only son of your great enemy.
Juliet.My only love, sprung from my only hate! Too early seen unknown, and known too late! Prodigious birth of love it is to me That I must love a loathèd enemy.
Nurse.What's this? What's this?
Juliet.A rhyme I learnt even now Of one I danced withal. One calls within,"Juliet."
Nurse.Anon, anon! Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
Exeunt.
128 fayfaith 142 Prodigious(1) monstrous (2) of evil portent 145 Anonat once
[ACT 2
PROLOGUE.
Enter] Chorus.
Chorus.Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie, And young affection gapes to be his heir; That fair for which love groaned for and would die, With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair. Now Romeo is beloved and loves again, Alike bewitchèd by the charm of looks; But to his foe supposed he must complain, And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks. Being held a foe, he may not have access To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear, And she as much in love, her means much less To meet her new belovèd anywhere; But passion lends them power, time means, to meet, Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet. [Exit.]
2. Prologue 2 young affection gapesthe new love is eager 3 That fairi.e., Rosaline 6 Alike bewitchèdi.e., both are bewitched 7 complainaddress his lover's suit 10 use tocustomarily 14 Temp'ring . . . sweetsoftening difficulties with extraordinary delights 33
[Scene 1. Near Capulet's orchard.]
Enter Romeo alone.
Romeo.Can I go forward when my heart is here? Turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out. Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.[Romeo retires.]
Benvolio.Romeo! My cousin Romeo! Romeo!
Mercutio.He is wise And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
Benvolio.He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall. Call, good Mercutio.
Mercutio.Nay, I'll conjure too. Romeo! Humors! Madman! Passion! Lover! Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh; Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied! Cry but "Ay me!" pronounce but "love" and "dove"; Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word, One nickname for her purblind son and heir, Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so true When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid! He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not; The ape is dead, and I must conjure him. I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes, By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
2.1.1-2 Can . . . out(Romeo refuses to pass Capulet's house, commanding his body, or earth,to stop and join its proper soul, or center—i.e., Juliet) 11 gossipcrony 12 purblindquite blind 13 AbrahamCupid(the phrase may mean "ancient youth" or, since "abram man" was slang for "trickster," "rascally Cupid") 14 King Cophetua . . .maid(reference to an old familiar ballad) 16 The ape is deadi.e., Romeo plays dead, like a performing apeBy her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh, And the demesnes that there adjacent lie, That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
Benvolio.And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
Mercutio.This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle Of some strange nature, letting it there stand Till she had laid it and conjured it down. That were some spite; my invocation Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name, I conjure only but to raise up him.
Benvolio.Come, he hath hid himself among these trees To be consorted with the humorous night. Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
Mercutio.If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark. Now will he sit under a medlar tree And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit As maids call medlars when they laugh alone. O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were An open et cetera,thou a pop'rin pear! Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle bed; This field bed is too cold for me to sleep. Come, shall we go?
Benvolio.Go then, for 'tis in vain To seek him here that means not to be found.
Exit[with others].
20 demesnesdomains 22 And ifif 24 circle(conjurers worked within a magic circle, but there is also a bawdy innuendo, as in stand, laid, down, raise) 27 spitevexation 28 fair and honestrespectable 31 consortedassociated 31 humorous(1) damp (2) moody 36 medlarsapplelike fruit, eaten when decayed (like pop'rin,in line 38, the word was often used to refer to sexual organs) 39 I'll to my truckle bedI'll go to my trundle bed, or baby bed (i.e., I'm innocent in affairs of this kind)
[Scene 2. Capulet's orchard.]
Romeo.[Coming forward] He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
[Enter Juliet at a window.]
But soft! What light through yonder window breaks? It is the East, and Juliet is the sun! Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, Who is already sick and pale with grief That thou her maid art far more fair than she. Be not her maid, since she is envious. Her vestal livery is but sick and green, And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off. It is my lady! O, it is my love! O, that she knew she were! She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that? Her eye discourses; I will answer it. I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks. Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven, Having some business, do entreat her eyes To twinkle in their spheres till they return. What if her eyes were there, they in her head? The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven Would through the airy region stream so bright That birds would sing and think it were not night. See how she leans her cheek upon her hand! O, that I were a glove upon that hand, That I might touch that cheek!
Juliet.Ay me!
2.2.6 her maid(the moon is here thought of as Diana, goddess and patroness of virgins) 8vestal liveryi.e., virginity 8 sick and greensickly, bearing the characteristics of greensickness, the virgin's malady 17 spheresorbits
Romeo.She speaks. O, speak again, bright angel, for thou art As glorious to this night, being o'er my head, As is a wingèd messenger of heaven Unto the white-upturnèd wond'ring eyes Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him When he bestrides the lazy puffing clouds And sails upon the bosom of the air.
Juliet.O Romeo, Romeo! Wherefore art thou Romeo? Deny thy father and refuse thy name; Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love, And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Romeo.[Aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Juliet.'Tis but thy name that is my enemy. Thou art thyself, though not a Montague. What's Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot, Nor arm, nor face. O, be some other name Belonging to a man. What's in a name? That which we call a rose By any other word would smell as sweet. So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called, Retain that dear perfection which he owes Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name; And for thy name, which is no part of thee, Take all myself.
Romeo.I take thee at thy word. Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized; Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Juliet.What man art thou, that, thus bescreened in night, So stumblest on my counsel?
Romeo.By a name I know not how to tell thee who I am. My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself
39 though noteven if you were not 46 owesowns
Because it is an enemy to thee. Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Juliet.My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words Of thy tongue's uttering, yet I know the sound. Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Romeo.Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.
Juliet.How camest thou hither, tell me, and where- fore? The orchard walls are high and hard to climb, And the place death, considering who thou art, If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
Romeo.With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls; For stony limits cannot hold love out, And what love can do, that dares love attempt. Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
Juliet.If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
Romeo.Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet, And I am proof against their enmity.
Juliet.I would not for the world they saw thee here.
Romeo.I have night's cloak to hide me from their eyes; And but thou love me, let them find me here. My life were better ended by their hate Than death proroguèd, wanting of thy love.
Juliet.By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Romeo.By love, that first did prompt me to inquire. He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes. I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea, I should adventure for such merchandise.
Juliet.Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
61 dislikedispleases 66 o'erperchfly over 73 proofprotected 76 butif only 78 proroguèddeferred 84 adventurerisk the journey
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight. Fain would I dwell on form—fain, fain deny What I have spoke; but farewell compliment! Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say "Ay"; And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st, Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries, They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo, If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully. Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won, I'll frown and be perverse and say thee nay, So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world. In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond, And therefore thou mayst think my havior light; But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true Than those that have more cunning to be strange. I should have been more strange, I must confess, But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware, My truelove passion. Therefore pardon me, And not impute this yielding to light love, Which the dark night hath so discoverèd.
Romeo.Lady, by yonder blessèd moon I vow, That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops—
Juliet.O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon, That monthly changes in her circle orb, Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Romeo.What shall I swear by?
Juliet.Do not swear at all; Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self, Which is the god of my idolatry, And I'll believe thee.
Romeo.If my heart's dear love—
Juliet.Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee, I have no joy of this contract tonight.
89 complimentformal courtesy 98 fond(1) affectionate (2) foolishly tender 99 haviorbehavior 101 strangealoof 106 discoverèdrevealed
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden; Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be Ere one can say it lightens. Sweet, good night! This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath, May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet. Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Romeo.O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Juliet.What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
Romeo.Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Juliet.I gave thee mine before thou didst request it; And yet I would it were to give again.
Romeo.Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
Juliet.But to be frank and give it thee again. And yet I wish but for the thing I have. My bounty is as boundless as the sea, My love as deep; the more I give to thee, The more I have, for both are infinite. I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
[Nurse calls within.]
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true. Stay but a little, I will come again. [Exit.]
Romeo.O blessèd, blessèd night! I am afeard, Being in night, all this is but a dream, Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
[Enter Juliet again.]
Juliet.Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed. If that thy bent of love be honorable, Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow, By one that I'll procure to come to thee, Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
131 frankgenerous 133 bountycapacity for giving 143 bentaim
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
[Nurse. Within] Madam!
Juliet.I come anon.—But if thou meanest not well, I do beseech thee—[Nurse. Within] Madam!
Juliet.By and by I come.—To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief. Tomorrow will I send.
Romeo.So thrive my soul—
Juliet.A thousand times good night! [Exit.]
Romeo.A thousand times the worse, to want thy light! Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books; But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
Enter Juliet again.
Juliet.Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falc'ner's voice To lure this tassel gentle back again! Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud, Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine With repetition of "My Romeo!"
Romeo.It is my soul that calls upon my name. How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night, Like softest music to attending ears!
Juliet.Romeo!
Romeo.My sweet?
Juliet.What o'clock tomorrow Shall I send to thee?
151 By and byat once 152 strifeefforts 159 tassel gentletercel gentle, male falcon 160 Bondage is hoarsei.e., being surrounded by "protectors," I cannot cry loudly 166 attendingattentive
Romeo.By the hour of nine.
Juliet.I will not fail. 'Tis twenty year till then. I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Romeo.Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Juliet.I shall forget, to have thee still stand there, Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
Romeo.And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget, Forgetting any other home but this.
Juliet.'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone—And yet no farther than a wanton's bird, That lets it hop a little from his hand, Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves, And with a silken thread plucks it back again, So loving-jealous of his liberty.
Romeo.I would I were thy bird.
Juliet.Sweet, so would I. Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing. Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
[Exit.]
Romeo.Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast! Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest! Hence will I to my ghostly friar's close cell, His help to crave and my dear hap to tell. Exit.
177 wanton'scapricious child's 179 gyvesfetters 185 morrowmorning 187 rest(the four lines that follow in the quarto are here deleted because they are virtually identical with the first four lines of the next scene. See Textual Note. Apparently Shakespeare wrote them and then decided to use them at the start of the next scene, but forgot to delete their first occurrence) 188 ghostly friarspiritual father (i.e., confessor) 189 dear hapgood fortune
[Scene 3. Friar Lawrence's cell.]
Enter Friar[Lawrence] alone, with a basket.
Friar.The gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night, Check'ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light; And fleckèd darkness like a drunkard reels From forth day's path and Titan's burning wheels. Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry, I must upfill this osier cage of ours With baleful weeds and precious-juicèd flowers. The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb. What is her burying grave, that is her womb; And from her womb children of divers kind We sucking on her natural bosom find, Many for many virtues excellent, None but for some, and yet all different. O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities; For naught so vile that on the earth doth live But to the earth some special good doth give; Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use, Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse. Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied, And vice sometime by action dignified.
Enter Romeo.
2.3.3 fleckèdspotted 4 Titan's burning wheelswheels of the sun's chariot 7 osier cagewillow basket 8 baleful(1) evil (2) poisonous 15 micklemuch 19 straineddiverted 20 Revolts from true birthfalls away from its real purpose 22 dignifiedmade worthy 22 s.d. Enter Romeo(the entry of Romeo at this point, unseen by the Friar, emphasizes the appropriateness of the remaining eight lines of the Friar's speech, not only to the flower but to Romeo)
Within the infant rind of this weak flower Poison hath residence and medicine power; For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part; Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart. Two such opposèd kings encamp them still In man as well as herbs—grace and rude will; And where the worser is predominant, Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Romeo.Good morrow, father.
Friar. Benedicite!What early tongue so sweet saluteth me? Young son, it argues a distemperèd head So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed. Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye, And where care lodges, sleep will never lie; But where unbruisèd youth with unstuffed brain Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign. Therefore thy earliness doth me assure Thou art uproused with some distemp'rature; Or if not so, then here I hit it right—Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.
Romeo.That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.
Friar.God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Romeo.With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No. I have forgot that name and that name's woe.
Friar.That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
Romeo.I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again. I have been feasting with mine enemy, Where on a sudden one hath wounded me That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
23 infant rindtender bark, skin 24 medicinemedicinal 25 For . . .parti.e., being smelled, this flower stimulates every part of the body 27 stillalways 30 cankercankerworm, larva that feeds on leaves 31 Benedicitebless you 33 distemperèd headtroubled mind 37 unstuffeduntroubled
Within thy help and holy physic lies. I bear no hatred, blessèd man, for, lo, My intercession likewise steads my foe.
Friar.Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift. Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Romeo.Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set On the fair daughter of rich Capulet; As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine, And all combined, save what thou must combine By holy marriage. When and where and how We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow, I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray, That thou consent to marry us today.
Friar.Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here! Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear, So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes. Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline! How much salt water thrown away in waste To season love, that of it doth not taste! The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears, Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears. Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit Of an old tear that is not washed off yet. If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine, Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline. And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence then: Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
Romeo.Thou chidst me oft for loving Rosaline.
Friar.For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
52 physicmedicine 54 intercessionentreaty 54 steadshelps 55 homely in thy driftplain in your talk 56 shriftabsolution 60 combined(1) brought into unity (2) settled 72 season(1) preserve (2) flavor 80 may falli.e., may be expected to be fickle 80 strengthconstancy
Romeo.And badst me bury love.
Friar.Not in a grave To lay one in, another out to have.
Romeo.I pray thee chide me not. Her I love now Doth grace for grace and love for love allow. The other did not so.
Friar.O, she knew well Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell. But come, young waverer, come go with me. In one respect I'll thy assistant be; For this alliance may so happy prove To turn your households' rancor to pure love.
Romeo.O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
Friar.Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Exeunt.
[Scene 4. A street.]
Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.
Mercutio.Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home tonight?
Benvolio.Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
Mercutio.Why, that same pale hardhearted wench, that Rosaline, Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
Benvolio.Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet, Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Mercutio.A challenge, on my life.
86 gracefavor 88 did read . . . spelli.e., said words without understanding them 90 In one respectwith respect to one particular 93 stand oninsist on
Benvolio.Romeo will answer it.
Mercutio.Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Benvolio.Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being dared.
Mercutio.Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead: stabbed with a white wench's black eye; run through the ear with a love song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft; and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
Benvolio.Why, what is Tybalt?
Mercutio.More than Prince of Cats. O, he's the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing pricksong—keeps time, distance, and pro- portion; he rests his minim rests, one, two, and the third in your bosom! The very butcher of a silk button, a duelist, a duelist! A gentleman of the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal passado!The punto reverso!The hay!
Benvolio.The what?
Mercutio.The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes—these new tuners of accent! "By Jesu, a very good blade! A very tall man! A very good whore!" Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these
2.4.15 pincenter (of a target) 16 blind bow-boy's butt-shaftCupid's blunt arrow 19 Prince of Cats(Tybalt's name, or some variant of it, was given to the cat in medieval stories of Reynard the Fox) 20 com-plimentsformal courtesies 21 sing pricksong(1) sing from a text (2) sing with attention to accuracy 22 he rests his minim restsi.e., he scrupulously observes every formality (literally, he observes even the shortest rests in the notation) 24 button(on his opponent's shirt) 25 first housefirst rank 25 first and second cause(dueling terms, meaning formal grounds for taking offense and giving a challenge) 26 passadolunge 26 punto reversobackhanded stroke 27 hayhome thrust (Italian hai) 30 fantasticoesfops 31 tallbrave
strange flies, these fashionmongers, these pardon- me's, who stand so much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? O, their bones, their bones!
Enter Romeo.
Benvolio.Here comes Romeo! Here comes Romeo!
Mercutio.Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura, to his lady, was a kitchen wench (marry, she had a better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy, Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a gray eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour!There's a French salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
Romeo.Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Mercutio.The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not con- ceive?
Romeo.Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Mercutio.That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.
34-35 pardon-me'si.e., persons who affect foreign phrases (cf. Italian perdona mi) 35 form(1) fashion (2) bench 37 bones(pun on French bon) 39 Without his roei.e., (1) emaciated like a fish that has spawned or (2) stripped of "Ro," leaving only "me-o" (a sigh) 41 numbersverses 41 Laura(Petrarch's beloved) 43 Dido(Queen of Carthage, enamored of Aeneas) 43 dowdya drab woman 44 gypsya deceitful woman (gypsies were commonly believed to be Egyptians) 44 Helen and Hero(beloved respectively of Paris and Leander) 44 hildingsgood-for-nothings 45 Thisbe(beloved of Pyramus in a story analogous to that of Romeo and Juliet) 45 gray eyei.e., gleam in the eye 47 sloploose breeches 51 slip(1) escape (2) counterfeit coin 56 case(1) situation (2) physical condition
Romeo.Meaning, to curtsy.
Mercutio.Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Romeo.A most courteous exposition.
Mercutio.Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Romeo.Pink for flower.
Mercutio.Right.
Romeo.Why, then is my pump well-flowered.
Mercutio.Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
Romeo.O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Mercutio.Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faints.
Romeo.Swits and spurs, swits and spurs; or I'll cry a match.
Mercutio.Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
Romeo.Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there for the goose.
Mercutio.I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
59 most kindly hitmost politely interpreted 61 pinkperfection (but Romeo proceeds to exploit two other meanings: [1] flower [2] punches in an ornamental design) 64 pumpshoe 64 well-floweredornamented with pinking (with pun on "floored") 68 solely singular(1) single-soled (i.e., weak) (2) uniquely remarkable (literally, "uniquely unique") 73 Switsswitches 73-74 cry a matchclaim a victory 75 wild-goose chasecross-country game of "follow the leader" on horseback 78 gooseend of the chase (i.e., end of the punning match) 80 gooseprostitute
Romeo.Nay, good goose, bite not!
Mercutio.Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
Romeo.And is it not, then, well served in to a sweet goose?
Mercutio.O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad!
Romeo.I stretch it out for that word "broad," which added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Mercutio.Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature. For this driveling love is like a great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
Benvolio.Stop there, stop there!
Mercutio.Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Benvolio.Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Mercutio.O, thou art deceived! I would have made it short; for I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer.
Romeo.Here's goodly gear!
82 good goose, bite not(proverbial for "Spare me!") 83 bitter sweetingtart kind of apple 85-86 sweet goosetender goose (here probably referring to Mercutio; but the expression "Sour sauce for sweet meat" was proverbial) 87 cheverilkid leather, easily stretched 88 ell broadforty-five inches wide 91 broadindecent (?) 96 naturalidiot 96 lollingwith tongue hanging out 97 baubletrinket (with ribald innuendo) 99-100 against the hairagainst my inclination 102 largeindecent 105 occupy the argumentdiscuss the matter 107 gearstuff
Enter Nurse and her Man[Peter].
A sail, a sail!
Mercutio.Two, two! A shirt and a smock.
Nurse.Peter!
Peter.Anon.
Nurse.My fan, Peter.
Mercutio.Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face.
Nurse.God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Mercutio.God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Nurse.Is it good-den?
Mercutio.'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.
Nurse.Out upon you! What a man are you!
Romeo.One, gentlewoman, that God hath made, him- self to mar.
Nurse.By my troth, it is well said. "For himself to mar," quoth 'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?
Romeo.I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
Nurse.You say well.
Mercutio.Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! Wisely, wisely.
Nurse.If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
109 A shirt and a smocki.e., a man and a woman 116 good-dengood evening (i.e., afternoon) 119 prickpoint on the dial of a clock (with bawdy innuendo) 124 quoth 'aindeed (literally, "said he") 128-29 for fault of a worse(mock-modestly parodying "for want of a better") 131 tookunderstood 133 confidenceconference (possibly a malapropism)
Benvolio.She will endite him to some supper.
Mercutio.A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Romeo.What hast thou found?
Mercutio.No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
[He walks by them and sings.]
An old hare hoar, And an old hare hoar, Is very good meat in Lent; But a hare that is hoar Is too much for a score When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
Romeo.I will follow you.
Mercutio.Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell, [singing] "Lady, lady, lady." Exeunt[Mercutio, Benvolio].
Nurse.I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery?
Romeo.A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
Nurse.And 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, and 'a were lustier than he is, and twenty such Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am
135 enditeinvite (Benvolio's intentional malapropism?) 136 So ho!(cry on sighting a quarry) 138 hareprostitute 138-39 lenten pierabbit pie (eaten sparingly and hence stale) 139 hoargray-haired, moldy (wordplay on "hare" and "whore") 151 Lady, lady, lady(ballad refrain from "Chaste Susanna") 153 roperyrascally talk 160 flirt-gillsflirting wenches
none of his skainsmates. And thou must stand by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
Peter.I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side.
Nurse.Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you, my young lady bid me inquire you out. What she bid me say, I will keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her in a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say; for the gentle- woman is young; and therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
Romeo.Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee—
Nurse.Good heart, and i' faith I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Romeo.What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
Nurse.I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Romeo.Bid her devise Some means to come to shrift this afternoon; And there she shall at Friar Lawrence' cell Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
Nurse.No, truly, sir; not a penny.
Romeo.Go to! I say you shall.
Nurse.This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
161 skainsmatesharlots (?) daggers' mates (i.e., outlaws' mates) 173 fool's paradiseseduction 177 weakunmanly, unscrupulous
Romeo.And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall. Within this hour my man shall be with thee And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair, Which to the high topgallant of my joy Must be my convoy in the secret night. Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains. Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
Nurse.Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Romeo.What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Nurse.Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say, Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Romeo.Warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
Nurse.Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord! When 'twas a little prating thing—O, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her some- times, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?
Romeo.Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
Nurse.Ah, mocker! That's the dog's name. Ris for the—No; I know it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.
Romeo.Commend me to thy lady.
Nurse.Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Peter.Anon.
Nurse.Before, and apace. Exit[after Peter].
195 tackled stairrope ladder 196 topgallantsummit (mast above the topmast) 197 convoyconveyance 198 quitreward 207-08 lay knife aboardtake a slice 208 had as lievewould rather 212 cloutcloth 212 versal worlduniverse 215 dog's name(the Rsound suggests a dog's growl) 217 sententioussentences, pithy sayings
[Scene 5. Capulet's orchard.]
Enter Juliet.
Juliet.The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse; In half an hour she promised to return. Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so. O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts, Which ten times faster glides than the sun's beams Driving back shadows over low'ring hills. Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw Love, And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings. Now is the sun upon the highmost hill Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve Is three long hours; yet she is not come. Had she affections and warm youthful blood, She would be as swift in motion as a ball; My words would bandy her to my sweet love, And his to me. But old folks, many feign as they were dead—Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Enter Nurse[and Peter].
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news? Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Nurse.Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit Peter.]
Juliet.Now, good sweet nurse—O Lord, why lookest thou sad? Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
2.5.7 nimble-pinioned dovesswift-winged doves (sacred to Venus) 14 bandy herspeed her 16 old . . . deadi.e., many old people move about as if they were almost dead
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Nurse.I am aweary, give me leave awhile. Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I!
Juliet.I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news. Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Nurse.Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile? Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Juliet.How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath To say to me that thou art out of breath? The excuse that thou dost make in this delay Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that. Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance. Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Nurse.Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a foot, and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?
Juliet.No, no. But all this did I know before. What says he of our marriage? What of that?
Nurse.Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I! It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. My back a t' other side—ah, my back, my back! Beshrew your heart for sending me about To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
26 jauncejaunt, fatiguing walk 29 staywait 36 stay the circumstancewait for the details 38 simplefoolish 51 aon 52 Beshrewcurse (in the sense of "shame on")
Juliet.I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well. Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Nurse.Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I warrant, a virtuous—Where is your mother?
Juliet.Where is my mother? Why, she is within. Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest! "Your love says, like an honest gentleman, ‘Where is your mother?' "
Nurse.O God's Lady dear! Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow. Is this the poultice for my aching bones? Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Juliet.Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
Nurse.Have you got leave to go to shrift today?
Juliet.I have.
Nurse.Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence' cell; There stays a husband to make you a wife. Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks: They'll be in scarlet straight at any news. Hie you to church; I must another way, To fetch a ladder, by the which your love Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark. I am the drudge, and toil in your delight; But you shall bear the burden soon at night. Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Juliet.Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Exeunt.
63 hotangry 63 Marry . . . trowindeed, come now, by the Virgin 66 coildisturbance 72 straightstraightway
[Scene 6. Friar Lawrence's cell.]
Enter Friar[Lawrence] and Romeo.
Friar.So smile the heavens upon this holy act That afterhours with sorrow chide us not!
Romeo.Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can, It cannot countervail the exchange of joy That one short minute gives me in her sight. Do thou but close our hands with holy words, Then love-devouring death do what he dare—It is enough I may but call her mine.
Friar.These violent delights have violent ends And in their triumph die, like fire and powder, Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey Is loathsome in his own deliciousness And in the taste confounds the appetite. Therefore love moderately: long love doth so; Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Enter Juliet.
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint. A lover may bestride the gossamers That idles in the wanton summer air, And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Juliet.Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Friar.Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
2.6.4 countervailequal 13 confoundsdestroys 17 Will . . . flinti.e., Juliet's feet are lighter than waterdrops, which are proverbially said to wear away stones 18 gossamersspiders' webs 19 wantoncapricious 20 vanitya transitory thing (an earthly lover and his love)
Juliet.As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Romeo.Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath This neighbor air, and let rich music's tongue Unfold the imagined happiness that both Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Juliet.Conceit, more rich in matter than in words, Brags of his substance, not of ornament. They are but beggars that can count their worth; But my true love is grown to such excess I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
Friar.Come, come with me, and we will make short work; For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone Till Holy Church incorporate two in one. [Exeunt.]
23 As much to himi.e., the same greeting to Romeo 25-26 thy skill . . . blazon ityou are better able to set it forth 30-31 Conceit . . . ornamenti.e., true understanding is its own proud manifestation and does not need words
[ACT 3
Scene 1. A public place.]
Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and Men.
Benvolio.I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire. The day is hot, the Capels are abroad, And, if we meet, we shall not 'scape a brawl, For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Mercutio.Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says, "God send me no need of thee!" and by the operation of the second cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Benvolio.Am I like such a fellow?
Mercutio.Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
Benvolio.And what to?
Mercutio.Nay, and there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! Why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath
3.1.9 draws him on the drawerdraws his sword on the waiter 14 moodyangry 14 moody to be movedquick-tempered
a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. Thou has quarreled with a man for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? With another for tying his new shoes with old riband? And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling!
Benvolio.And I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
Mercutio.The fee simple? O simple!
Enter Tybalt, Petruchio, and others.
Benvolio.By my head, here comes the Capulets.
Mercutio.By my heel, I care not.
Tybalt.Follow me close, for I will speak to them. Gentlemen, good-den. A word with one of you.
Mercutio.And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
Tybalt.You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, and you will give me occasion.
Mercutio.Could you not take some occasion without giving?
Tybalt.Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
29 doubletjacket 31 ribandribbon 33 fee simpleabsolute possession 33-34 for an hour and a quarteri.e., the life expectancy of one with Mercutio's penchant for quarreling 35 O simpleO stupid 35 Petruchio(in 1.5 he was one of Capulet's guests, but he has no lines) 39 good-dengood evening (i.e., afternoon)
Mercutio.Consort? What, dost thou make us min- strels? And thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
Benvolio.We talk here in the public haunt of men. Either withdraw unto some private place, Or reason coldly of your grievances, Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
Mercutio.Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze. I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
Enter Romeo.
Tybalt.Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Mercutio.But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery. Marry, go before the field, he'll be your follower! Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Tybalt.Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford No better term than this: thou art a villain.
Romeo.Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee Doth much excuse the appertaining rage To such a greeting. Villain am I none. Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Tybalt.Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
Romeo.I do protest I never injured thee, But love thee better than thou canst devise Till thou shalt know the reason of my love; And so, good Capulet, which name I tender As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
47 Consort(1) to keep company with (2) company of musicians 49 fiddlesticki.e., sword 50 Zoundsby God's wounds 57 man(Mercutio takes this to mean "manservant") 58 liveryservant's uniform 59 fielddueling field 62 villainlow fellow 64 appertainingappropriate 70 deviseimagine 72 tendervalue
Mercutio.O calm, dishonorable, vile submission! Alla stoccata carries it away. [Draws.] Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Tybalt.What wouldst thou have with me?
Mercutio.Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.
Tybalt.I am for you. [Draws.]
Romeo.Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Mercutio.Come, sir, your passado! [They fight.]
Romeo.Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons. Gentlemen, for shame! Forbear this outrage! Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath Forbid this bandying in Verona streets. Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
[Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in, and flies.]
Mercutio.I am hurt. A plague a both houses! I am sped. Is he gone and hath nothing?
Benvolio.What, art thou hurt?
Mercutio.Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough. Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
[Exit Page.]
Romeo.Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
Mercutio.No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide
75 Alla stoccata(a term in fencing, "At the thrust," which Mercutio uses contemptuously as a nickname for Tybalt) 76 walkstep aside 79 make bold withalmake bold with, take 80 dry-beatthrash 82 pilcherscabbard 86 passadolunge 90 bandyingbrawling 92 aon 92 spedwounded
as a church door; but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague a both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! A braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of arith- metic! Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
Romeo.I thought all for the best.
Mercutio.Help me into some house, Benvolio, Or I shall faint. A plague a both your houses! They have made worms' meat of me. I have it, And soundly too. Your houses!
Exit[Mercutio and Benvolio].
Romeo.This gentleman, the Prince's near ally, My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt In my behalf—my reputation stained With Tybalt's slander—Tybalt, that an hour Hath been my cousin. O sweet Juliet, Thy beauty hath made me effeminate And in my temper soft'ned valor's steel!
Enter Benvolio.
Benvolio.O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead! That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds, Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Romeo.This day's black fate on moe days doth depend; This but begins the woe others must end.
[Enter Tybalt.]
Benvolio.Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Romeo.Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
99 grave(1) extremely serious (2) ready for the grave 100 am pepperedhave been given a deathblow 103-04 by the book of arithmeticby formal rules 109 I have iti.e., I have received my deathblow 111 allyrelative 112 verytrue 117 in . . . steelsoftened the valorous part of my character 119 aspiredclimbed to 121 moemore 121 dependhang over
Away to heaven respective lenity, And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now! Now, Tybalt, take the "villain" back again That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul Is but a little way above our heads, Staying for thine to keep him company. Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Tybalt.Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here, Shalt with him hence.
Romeo.This shall determine that.
They fight. Tybalt falls.
Benvolio.Romeo, away, be gone! The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain. Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away! Romeo.O, I am fortune's fool! Benvolio.Why dost thou stay?
Exit Romeo.
Enter Citizens.
Citizen.Which way ran he that killed Mercutio? Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
Benvolio.There lies that Tybalt.
Citizen.Up, sir, go with me. I charge thee in the Prince's name obey. Enter Prince, old Montague, Capulet, their Wives,and all.
Prince.Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Benvolio.O noble Prince, I can discover all The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
125 respective lenitydiscriminating mercifulness 126 conductguide 138 foolplaything, dupe 144 discoverreveal 145 managecourse
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo, That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Lady Capulet.Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child! O Prince! O cousin! Husband! O, the blood is spilled Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true, For blood of ours shed blood of Montague. O cousin, cousin!
Prince.Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Benvolio.Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay. Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal Your high displeasure. All this—utterèd With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed—Could not take truce with the unruly spleen Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast; Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point, And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats Cold death aside and with the other sends It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud, "Hold, friends! Friends, part!" and swifter than his tongue, His agile arm beats down their fatal points, And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled; But by and by comes back to Romeo, Who had but newly entertained revenge, And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain; And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly. This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
156 nicetrivial 156 urgedmentioned 159 spleenill nature 160 tiltsthrusts 170 enviousfull of enmity 173 entertainedcontemplated
Lady Capulet.He is a kinsman to the Montague; Affection makes him false, he speaks not true. Some twenty of them fought in this black strife, And all those twenty could but kill one life. I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give. Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
Prince.Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio. Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Capulet.Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend; His fault concludes but what the law should end, The life of Tybalt.
Prince.And for that offense Immediately we do exile him hence. I have an interest in your hate's proceeding, My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding; But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine That you shall all repent the loss of mine. I will be deaf to pleading and excuses; Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses. Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste, Else, when he is found, that hour is his last. Bear hence this body and attend our will. Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Exit[with others].
[Scene 2. Capulet's orchard.]
Enter Juliet alone.
Juliet.Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner
191 My blood(Mercutio was the Prince's relative) 192 amercepunish by fine 198 attend our willrespect my decision 3.2.1 fiery-footed steedshorses of the sun god, Phoebus 2 Towards Phoebus'lodgingi.e., beneath the horizon
As Phaëton would whip you to the west And bring in cloudy night immediately. Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night, That runaways' eyes may wink, and Romeo Leap to these arms untalked of and unseen. Lovers can see to do their amorous rites, And by their own beauties; or, if love be blind, It best agrees with night. Come, civil night, Thou sober-suited matron all in black, And learn me how to lose a winning match, Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods. Hood my unmanned blood, bating in my cheeks, With thy black mantle till strange love grow bold, Think true love acted simple modesty. Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night; For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back. Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-browed night; Give me my Romeo; and, when I shall die, Take him and cut him out in little stars, And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night And pay no worship to the garish sun. O, I have bought the mansion of a love, But not possessed it; and though I am sold, Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day As is the night before some festival To an impatient child that hath new robes And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
Enter Nurse, with cords.
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
3 PhaëtonPhoebus' son, who mismanaged the horses and let them run away 6 runaways'of the horses (?) 6 winkshut 14 Hoodi.e., cover with a hood, as in falconry 14 unmanned(1) untamed (2) unmated 14 batingfluttering 15 strangeunfamiliar
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there, the cords That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Nurse.Ay, ay, the cords.
Juliet.Ay me! What news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?
Nurse.Ah, weraday! He's dead, he's dead, he's dead! We are undone, lady, we are undone! Alack the day! He's gone, he's killed, he's dead!
Juliet.Can heaven be so envious?
Nurse.Romeo can, Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo! Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Juliet.What devil art thou that dost torment me thus? This torture should be roared in dismal hell. Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but "Ay," And that bare vowel "I" shall poison more Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice. I am not I, if there be such an "Ay," Or those eyes' shot that makes thee answer "Ay." If he be slain, say "Ay"; or if not, "No." Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Nurse.I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes, (God save the mark!) here on his manly breast. A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse; Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood, All in gore-blood. I sounded at the sight.
Juliet.O, break, my heart! Poor bankrout, break at once! To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
37 weradaywellaway, alas 47 cockatricebasilisk (a serpent fabled to have a killing glance) 48 Ay(1) I (2) eye 49 eyes' shoti.e., the Nurse's glance 53 God save the markGod avert the bad omen 54 corsecorpse 56 soundedswooned 57 bankroutbankrupt
Vile earth, to earth resign end motion here, And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
Nurse.O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had! O courteous Tybalt! Honest gentleman! That ever I should live to see thee dead!
Juliet.What storm is this that blows so contrary? Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead? My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord? Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom! For who is living, if those two are gone?
Nurse.Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banishèd; Romeo that killed him, he is banishèd.
Juliet.O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Nurse.It did, it did! Alas the day, it did!
Juliet.O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face! Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave? Beautiful tyrant! Fiend angelical! Dove-feathered raven! Wolvish-ravening lamb! Despisèd substance of divinest show! Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st—A damnèd saint, an honorable villain! O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh? Was ever book containing such vile matter So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell In such a gorgeous palace! Nurse.There's no trust, No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured, All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers. Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae. These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
59 vile earthreferring to her own body 59 resignreturn 67 dreadful . . . doomi.e., sound the trumpet of Doomsday 88 aqua vitaespirits
Shame come to Romeo!
JulietBlistered be thy tongue For such a wish! He was not born to shame. Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit; For 'tis a throne where honor may be crowned Sole monarch of the universal earth. O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Nurse.Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?
Juliet.Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband? Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it? But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin? That villain cousin would have killed my husband. Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring! Your tributary drops belong to woe, Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy. My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain; And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my hus- band. All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then? Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death, That murd'red me. I would forget it fain; But O, it presses to my memory Like damnèd guilty deeds to sinners' minds! "Tybalt is dead, and Romeo—banishèd." That "banishèd," that one word "banishèd," Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death Was woe enough, if it had ended there; Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship And needly will be ranked with other griefs, Why followed not, when she said "Tybalt's dead,"
103 tributarycontributed 117 needly . . . withmust be accompanied by
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both, Which modern lamentation might have moved? But with a rearward following Tybalt's death, "Romeo is banishèd"—to speak that word Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet, All slain, all dead. "Romeo is banishèd"—There is no end, no limit, measure, bound, In that word's death; no words can that woe sound. Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Nurse.Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse. Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Juliet.Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent, When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment. Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguiled, Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled. He made you for a highway to my bed; But I, a maid, die maiden-widowèd. Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed; And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Nurse.Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo To comfort you. I wot well where he is. Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night. I'll to him; he is hid at Lawrence' cell.
Juliet.O, find him! Give this ring to my true knight And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Exit[with Nurse].
[Scene 3. Friar Lawrence's cell.]
Enter Friar[Lawrence].
Friar.Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man. Affliction is enamored of thy parts, And thou art wedded to calamity.
120 modernordinary 121 rearwardrear guard 139 wotknow 3.3.1 fearfulfrightened 2 Affliction . . . partsaffliction is in love with your attractive qualities
[Enter Romeo.]
Romeo.Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom? What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand That I yet know not?
Friar.Too familiar Is my dear son with such sour company. I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
Romeo.What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
Friar.A gentler judgment vanished from his lips—Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Romeo.Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say "death"; For exile hath more terror in his look, Much more than death. Do not say "banishment."
Friar.Here from Verona art thou banishèd. Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Romeo.There is no world without Verona walls, But purgatory, torture, hell itself. Hence banishèd is banished from the world, And world's exile is death. Then "banishèd" Is death mistermed. Calling death "banishèd," Thou cut'st my head off with a golden ax And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
Friar.O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness! Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince, Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law, And turned that black word "death" to "banish- ment." This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
Romeo.'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here, Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog And little mouse, every unworthy thing, Live here in heaven and may look on her; But Romeo may not. More validity,
4 doomfinal decision 9 doomsdayi.e., my death 10 vanishedescaped 26 rushedpushed 33 validityvalue
More honorable state, more courtship lives In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand And steal immortal blessing from her lips, Who, even in pure and vestal modesty, Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin; But Romeo may not, he is banishèd. Flies may do this but I from this must fly; They are freemen, but I am banishèd. And sayest thou yet that exile is not death? Hadst thou no poison mixture, no sharp-ground knife, No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean, But "banishèd" to kill me—"banishèd"? O friar, the damnèd use that word in hell; Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart, Being a divine, a ghostly confessor, A sin-absolver, and my friend professed, To mangle me with that word "banishèd"?
Friar.Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Romeo.O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Friar.I'll give thee armor to keep off that word; Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy, To comfort thee, though thou art banishèd.
Romeo.Yet "banishèd"? Hang up philosophy! Unless philosophy can make a Juliet, Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom, It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
Friar.O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Romeo.How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Friar.Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
34 courtshipopportunity for courting 38 vestalvirgin 39 their own kisses sini.e., sin when they touch each other 45 mean . . . meanmethod . . . lowly 52 fondfoolish 57 Yetstill 63 disputediscuss 63 estatesituation
Romeo.Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel. Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love, An hour but married, Tybalt murderèd, Doting like me, and like me banishèd, Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair, And fall upon the ground, as I do now, Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Enter Nurse and knock.
Friar.Arise, one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Romeo.Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans Mistlike infold me from the search of eyes. [Knock.]
Friar.Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise; Thou wilt be taken.—Stay awhile!—Stand up;
[Knock.]
Run to my study.—By and by!—God's will, What simpleness is this.—I come, I come! KnockWho knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will?
Enter Nurse.
Nurse.Let me come in, and you shall know my er- rand. I come from Lady Juliet.
Friar.Welcome then.
Nurse.O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar, Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Friar.There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Nurse.O, he is even in my mistress' case,
70 Taking the measurei.e., measuring by my outstretched body 76 By and byin a moment (said to the person knocking) 77 simple-nesssilly behavior (Romeo refuses to rise) 84 case(with bawdy innuendo complementing "stand," "rise," etc. But the Nurse is unaware of this possible interpretation)
Just in her case! O woeful sympathy! Piteous predicament! Even so lies she, Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubb'ring. Stand up, stand up! Stand, and you be a man. For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand! Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Romeo.[Rises.] Nurse—
Nurse.Ah sir, ah sir! Death's the end of all.
Romeo.Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her? Doth not she think me an old murderer, Now I have stained the childhood of our joy With blood removed but little from her own? Where is she? And how doth she! And what says My concealed lady to our canceled love?
Nurse.O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps; And now falls on her bed, and then starts up, And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries, And then down falls again.
Romeo.As if that name, Shot from the deadly level of a gun, Did murder her; as that name's cursèd hand Murdered her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me, In what vile part of this anatomy Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack The hateful mansion.
[He offers to stab himself, and Nurse snatches the dagger away.]
Friar.Hold thy desperate hand. Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art; Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote The unreasonable fury of a beast. Unseemly woman in a seeming man! And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
90 so deep an Osuch a fit of moaning 98 canceledinvalidated 103 levelaim 107 sackplunder 111 unreasonableirrational 112 Unseemlyindecorous 113 ill-beseeming . . . bothi.e., inappropriate even to a beast in being both man and woman
Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order, I thought thy disposition better tempered. Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself? And slay thy lady that in thy life lives, By doing damnèd hate upon thyself? Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth? Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose. Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit, Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all, And usest none in that true use indeed Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit. Thy noble shape is but a form of wax, Digressing from the valor of a man; Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury, Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish; Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love, Misshapen in the conduct of them both, Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask, Is set afire by thine own ignorance, And thou dismemb'red with thine own defense. What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive, For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead. There are thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee, But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy. The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend And turns it to exile. There art thou happy. A pack of blessings light upon thy back; Happiness courts thee in her best array; But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench, Thou puts up thy fortune and thy love. Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
120 birth and heaven and earthfamily origin, soul, and body 121 loseabandon 122 witintellect 123 Whichwho 125 bedeckdo honor to 127 valor of a mani.e., his manly qualities 131 conductmanagement 132 flaskpowder flask 134 dismemb'red . . . defense(i.e., your intellect, properly the defender of shape and love, is set off independently and destroys all) 136 deadi.e., declaring yourself dead 137 happyfortunate
Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed, Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her. But look thou stay not till the watch be set, For then thou canst not pass to Mantua, Where thou shalt live till we can find a time To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back With twenty hundred thousand times more joy Than thou went'st forth in lamentation. Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady, And bid her hasten all the house to bed, Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto. Romeo is coming.
Nurse.O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night To hear good counsel. O, what learning is! My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
Romeo.Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide. [Nurse offers to go in and turns again.]
Nurse.Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir. Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. [Exit.]
Romeo.How well my comfort is revived by this!
Friar.Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state: Either be gone before the watch be set, Or by the break of day disguised from hence. Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man, And he shall signify from time to time Every good hap to you that chances here. Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
Romeo.But that a joy past joy calls out on me, It were a grief so brief to part with thee. Farewell. Exeunt.
151 blazeannounce publicly 166 here . . . statethis is your situation
[Scene 4. A room in Capulet's house.]
Enter old Capulet, his Wife, and Paris.
Capulet.Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily That we have had no time to move our daughter. Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly, And so did I. Well, we were born to die. 'Tis very late; she'll not come down tonight. I promise you, but for your company, I would have been abed an hour ago.
Paris.These times of woe afford no times to woo. Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
Lady Capulet.I will, and know her mind early tomorrow; Tonight she's mewed up to her heaviness.
Capulet.Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender Of my child's love. I think she will be ruled In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not. Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed; Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next—But soft! What day is this?
Paris.Monday, my lord.
Capulet.Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon. A Thursday let it be—a Thursday, tell her, She shall be married to this noble earl. Will you be ready? Do you like this haste? We'll keep no great ado—a friend or two; For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
3.4.2 movediscuss the matter with 6 promiseassure 11 mewed . . .heavinessshut up with her grief 12 make . . . tenderrisk an offer 20 Aon
It may be thought we held him carelessly, Being our kinsman, if we revel much. Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends, And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
Paris.My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Capulet.Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then. Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed; Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day. Farewell, my lord.—Light to my chamber, ho! Afore me, it is so very late That we may call it early by and by. Good night Exeunt.
[Scene 5. Capulet's orchard.]
Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft.
Juliet.Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day. It was the nightingale, and not the lark, That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear. Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree. Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Romeo.It was the lark, the herald of the morn; No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East. Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day Stands tiptoe on the misty mountaintops. I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
Juliet.Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I. It is some meteor that the sun exhales To be to thee this night a torchbearer And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
32 againstin preparation for 34 Afore meindeed (a light oath) 35 by and bysoon 3.5.3 fearfulfearing 13 exhalesgives out
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Romeo.Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death. I am content, so thou wilt have it so. I'll say yon gray is not the morning's eye, 'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow; Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat The vaulty heaven so high above our heads. I have more care to stay than will to go. Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so. How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
Juliet.It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away! It is the lark that sings so out of tune, Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps. Some say the lark makes sweet division; This doth not so, for she divideth us. Some say the lark and loathèd toad change eyes; O, now I would they had changed voices too, Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray, Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day. O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
Romeo.More light and light—more dark and dark our woes.
Enter Nurse.
Nurse.Madam!
Juliet.Nurse?
Nurse.Your lady mother is coming to your chamber. The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit.]
Juliet.Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Romeo.Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
[He goeth down.]
Juliet.Art thou gone so, love-lord, ay husband-friend?
20 reflex of Cynthia's browreflection of the edge of the moon 29 divisionmelody (i.e., a division of notes) 33 affrayfrighten 34 hunt's-upmorning song (for hunters) 43 husband-friendhusband-lover
I must hear from thee every day in the hour, For in a minute there are many days. O, by this count I shall be much in years Ere I again behold my Romeo!
Romeo.Farewell! I will omit no opportunity That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
Juliet.O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
Romeo.I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve For sweet discourses in our times to come.
Juliet.O God, I have an ill-divining soul! Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low, As one dead in the bottom of a tomb. Either my eyesight fails, or thou lookest pale.
Romeo.And trust me, love, in my eye so do you. Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu! Exit.
Juliet.O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle. If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, Fortune, For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long But send him back.
Enter Mother.
Lady Capulet.Ho, daughter! Are you up?
Juliet.Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother. Is she not down so late, or up so early? What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
Lady Capulet.Why, how now, Juliet?
Juliet.Madam, I am not well.
Lady Capulet.Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
46 much in yearsmuch older 54 ill-diviningforeseeing evil 59 Drythirsty (as grief was thought to be) 61 what dost thouwhat business have you 67 not down so lateso late getting to bed
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears? And if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live. Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love; But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Juliet.Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Lady Capulet.So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend Which you weep for.
Juliet.Feeling so the loss, I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Lady Capulet.Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.
Juliet.What villain, madam?
Lady Capulet.That same villain Romeo.
Juliet.[Aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.—God pardon him! I do, with all my heart; And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
Lady Capulet.That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Juliet.Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands. Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Lady Capulet.We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not. Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua, Where that same banished runagate doth live, Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram That he shall soon keep Tybalt company; And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
Juliet.Indeed I never shall be satisfied With Romeo till I behold him—dead—
75 feeling lossloss to be felt 90 runagaterenegade 95 dead(Lady Capulet takes this to refer to "him"; Juliet takes it to refer to "heart")
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vexed. Madam, if you could find out but a man To bear a poison, I would temper it; That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof, Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors To hear him named and cannot come to him, To wreak the love I bore my cousin Upon his body that hath slaughtered him!
Lady Capulet.Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man. But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
Juliet.And joy comes well in such a needy time. What are they, beseech your ladyship?
Lady Capulet.Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child; One who, to put thee from thy heaviness, Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy That thou expects not nor I looked not for.
Juliet.Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
Lady Capulet.Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn The gallant, young, and noble gentleman, The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church, Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Juliet.Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too, He shall not make me there a joyful bride! I wonder at this haste, that I must wed Ere he that should be husband comes to woo. I pray you tell my lord and father, madam, I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate, Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
98 temper(1) mix (2) weaken 102 wreak(1) avenge (2) give expression to 108 carefulsolicitous 110 sorted outselected 112 in happy timemost opportunely
Lady Capulet.Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself, And see how he will take it at your hands.
Enter Capulet and Nurse.
Capulet.When the sun sets the earth doth drizzle dew, But for the sunset of my brother's son It rains downright. How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears? Evermore show'ring? In one little body Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind: For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea, Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is, Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs, Who, raging with thy tears and they with them, Without a sudden calm will overset Thy tempest-tossèd body. How now, wife? Have you delivered to her our decree?
Lady Capulet.Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks. I would the fool were married to her grave!
Capulet.Soft! Take me with you, take me with you, wife. How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks? Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest, Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?
Juliet.Not proud you have, but thankful that you have. Proud can I never be of what I hate, But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
Capulet.How, how, how, how, chopped-logic? What is this?
130 conduitwater pipe 137 suddenunanticipated, immediate 140 she gives you thanksshe'll have none of it, thank you 142 Soft . . . youWait! Help me to understand you 145 wroughtarranged 147 proudhighly pleased 150 chopped-logicchop logic, sophistry
"Proud"—and "I thank you"—and "I thank you not"—And yet "not proud"? Mistress minion you, Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds, But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church, Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither. Out, you greensickness carrion! Out, you baggage! You tallow-face!
Lady Capulet.Fie, fie! What, are you mad?
Juliet.Good father, I beseech you on my knees, Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Capulet.Hang thee, young baggage! Disobedient wretch! I tell thee what—get thee to church a Thursday Or never after look me in the face. Speak not, reply not, do not answer me! My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest That God had lent us but this only child; But now I see this one is one too much, And that we have a curse in having her. Out on her, hilding!
Nurse.God in heaven bless her! You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
Capulet.And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue, Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
Nurse.I speak no treason.
Capulet.O, God-i-god-en!
Nurse.May not one speak?
152 minionminx 154 fettlemake ready 156 hurdlesledge on which traitors were taken to execution 157 greensicknessanemic, after the fashion of young girls 157 baggagestrumpet 169 hildingworthless person 170 ratescold 172 Smatter with your gossipssave your chatter for your cronies 173 God-i-god-enGod give you good even (here equivalent to "Get on with you!")
Capulet.Peace, you mumbling fool! Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl, For here we need it not.
Lady Capulet.You are too hot.
Capulet.God's bread! It makes me mad. Day, night; hour, tide, time; work, play; Alone, in company; still my care hath been To have her matched; and having now provided A gentleman of noble parentage, Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly trained, Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts, Proportioned as one's thought would wish a man—And then to have a wretched puling fool, A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender, To answer "I'll not wed, I cannot love; I am too young, I pray you pardon me"! But, and you will not wed, I'll pardon you! Graze where you will, you shall not house with me. Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest. Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise: And you be mine, I'll give you to my friend; And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets, For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee, Nor what is mine shall never do thee good. Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn. Exit.
Juliet.Is there no pity sitting in the clouds That sees into the bottom of my grief? O sweet my mother, cast me not away! Delay this marriage for a month, a week; Or if you do not, make the bridal bed In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Lady Capulet.Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
177 God's breadby the sacred host 182 demesnesdomains 185 pulingwhining 186 mammetpuppet 186 in her fortune's tender(1) on good fortune's offer (2) subject to fortuitous circumstance (?) 189 I'll pardon youi.e., in a way you don't expect 191 do not use to jestam not in the habit of joking 192 adviseconsider
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. Exit.
Juliet.O God!—O nurse, how shall this be prevented? My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven. How shall that faith return again to earth Unless that husband send it me from heaven By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me. Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems Upon so soft a subject as myself! What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy? Some comfort, nurse.
Nurse.Faith, here it is. Romeo is banished; and all the world to nothing That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you; Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth. Then, since the case so stands as now it doth, I think it best you married with the County. O, he's a lovely gentleman! Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam, Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart, I think you are happy in this second match, For it excels your first; or if it did not, Your first is dead—or 'twere as good he were As living here and you no use of him.
Juliet.Speak'st thou from thy heart?
Nurse.And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Juliet.Amen!
Nurse.What?
Juliet.Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much. Go in; and tell my lady I am gone, Having displeased my father, to Lawrence' cell, To make confession and to be absolved.
207 my faith in heavenmy vow is recorded in heaven 210 By leaving earthi.e., by dying 215 all the world to nothing(the Nurse advises a safe bet) 221 dishcloutdishcloth 223 Beshrewcurse (used in light oaths)
Nurse.Marry, I will; and this is wisely done. [Exit.]
Juliet.Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend! Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn, Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue Which she hath praised him with above compare So many thousand times? Go, counselor! Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain. I'll to the friar to know his remedy. If all else fail, myself have power to die. Exit.
237 Ancient damnation(1) damned old woman (2) ancient devil (note the term "wicked fiend" immediately following) 238 forswornguilty of breaking a vow 242 Thou . . . twaini.e., you shall henceforth be separated from my trust
[ACT 4
Scene 1. Friar Lawrence's cell.]
Enter Friar[Lawrence] and County Paris.
Friar.On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
Paris.My father Capulet will have it so, And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
Friar.You say you do not know the lady's mind. Uneven is the course; I like it not.
Paris.Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death, And therefore have I little talked of love; For Venus smiles not in a house of tears. Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous That she do give her sorrow so much sway, And in his wisdom hastes our marriage To stop the inundation of her tears, Which, too much minded by herself alone, May be put from her by society. Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Friar.[Aside] I would I knew not why it should be slowed.—Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
4.1.3 I . . . hastei.e., I shall not check his haste by being slow myself 5 Unevenirregular 13 mindedthought about 13 by herself alonewhen she is alone
Enter Juliet.
Paris.Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Juliet.That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Paris.That "may be" must be, love, on Thursday next.
Juliet.What must be shall be.
Friar.That's a certain text.
Paris.Come you to make confession to this father?
Juliet.To answer that, I should confess to you.
Paris.Do not deny to him that you love me.
Juliet.I confess to you that I love him.
Paris.So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Juliet.If I do so, it will be of more price, Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Paris.Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
Juliet.The tears have got small victory by that, For it was bad enough before their spite.
Paris.Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
Juliet.That is no slander, sir, which is a truth; And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
Paris.Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
Juliet.It may be so, for it is not mine own. Are you at leisure, holy father, now, Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
Friar.My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now. My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
31 before their spitebefore they marred it 38 evening mass(evening mass was still said occasionally in Shakespeare's time) 40 entreat the time aloneask to have this time to ourselves
Paris.God shield I should disturb devotion! Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye. Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss. Exit.
Juliet.O, shut the door, and when thou hast done so, Come weep with me—past hope, past care, past help!
Friar.O Juliet, I already know thy grief; It strains me past the compass of my wits. I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it, On Thursday next be married to this County.
Juliet.Tell me not, friar, that thou hearest of this, Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it. If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help, Do thou but call my resolution wise And with this knife I'll help it presently. God joined my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands; And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's sealed, Shall be the label to another deed, Or my true heart with treacherous revolt Turn to another, this shall slay them both. Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time, Give me some present counsel; or, behold, 'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that Which the commission of thy years and art Could to no issue of true honor bring. Be not so long to speak. I long to die If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
Friar.Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope, Which craves as desperate an execution As that is desperate which we would prevent. If, rather than to marry County Paris, Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself, Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
41 God shieldGod forbid 48 proroguedelay 54 presentlyat once 57 labelbearer of the seal 57 deed(1) act (2) legal document 64 com-missionauthority
A thing like death to chide away this shame, That cop'st with death himself to scape from it; And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.
Juliet.O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris, From off the battlements of any tower, Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears, Or hide me nightly in a charnel house, O'ercovered quite with dead men's rattling bones, With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls; Or bid me go into a new-made grave And hide me with a dead man in his shroud—Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble—And I will do it without fear or doubt, To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.
Friar.Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow. Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone; Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber. Take thou this vial, being then in bed, And this distilling liquor drink thou off; When presently through all thy veins shall run A cold and drowsy humor; for no pulse Shall keep his native progress, but surcease; No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest; The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade To wanny ashes, thy eyes' windows fall Like death when he shuts up the day of life; Each part, deprived of supple government, Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death; And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours, And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
75 cop'stnegotiates 79 thievishinfested with thieves 81 charnel housevault for old bones 83 reekydamp 83 chaplessjawless 94 distillinginfusing 96 humorfluid 97 nativenatural 97 surceasestop 100 wannypale 100 windowslids 102 supple governmenti.e., faculty for maintaining motion
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead. Then, as the manner of our country is, In thy best robes uncovered on the bier Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie. In the meantime, against thou shalt awake, Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift; And hither shall he come; and he and I Will watch thy waking, and that very night Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua. And this shall free thee from this present shame, If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear Abate thy valor in the acting it.
Juliet.Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Friar.Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
Juliet.Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford. Farewell, dear father. Exit[with Friar].
[Scene 2. Hall in Capulet's house.]
Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen, two or three.
Capulet.So many guests invite as here are writ.
[Exit a Servingman.]
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
Servingman.You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick their fingers.
113 againstbefore 114 driftpurpose 119 inconstant toywhim 4.2.2 cunningskillful 3 trytest
Capulet.How canst thou try them so?
Servingman.Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.
Capulet.Go, begone. [Exit Servingman.] We shall be much unfurnished for this time. What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?
Nurse.Ay, forsooth.
Capulet.Well, he may chance to do some good on her. A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.
Enter Juliet.
Nurse.See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Capulet.How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
Juliet.Where I have learnt me to repent the sin Of disobedient opposition To you and your behests, and am enjoined By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you! Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
Capulet.Send for the County. Go tell him of this. I'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.
Juliet.I met the youthful lord at Lawrence' cell And gave him what becomèd love I might, Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Capulet.Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up. This is as't should be. Let me see the County. Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither. Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar, All our whole city is much bound to him.
6-7 cannot lick his own fingersi.e., cannot taste his own cooking 10 unfurnishedunprovisioned 14 A peevish self-willed harlotry it isshe's a silly good-for-nothing 26 becomèdproper
Juliet.Nurse, will you go with me into my closet To help me sort such needful ornaments As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
Lady Capulet.No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Capulet.Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church tomorrow. Exeunt[Juliet and Nurse]
Lady Capulet.We shall be short in our provision. 'Tis now near night.
Capulet.Tush, I will stir about, And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife. Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her. I'll not to bed tonight; let me alone. I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho! They are all forth; well, I will walk myself To County Paris, to prepare up him Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light, Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.
Exit[with Mother].
[Scene 3. Juliet's chamber.]
Enter Juliet and Nurse.
Juliet.Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse, I pray thee leave me to myself tonight; For I have need of many orisons To move the heavens to smile upon my state, Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
Enter Mother.
Lady Capulet.What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
33 closetprivate chamber 46 Againstin anticipation of 4.3.3 orisonsprayers 4 statecondition 5 crossperverse
Juliet.No, madam; we have culled such necessaries As are behoveful for our state tomorrow. So please you, let me now be left alone, And let the nurse this night sit up with you; For I am sure you have your hands full all In this so sudden business.
Lady Capulet.Good night. Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
Exeunt[Mother and Nurse].
Juliet.Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again. I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins That almost freezes up the heat of life. I'll call them back again to comfort me. Nurse!—What should she do here? My dismal scene I needs must act alone. Come, vial. What if this mixture do not work at all? Shall I be married then tomorrow morning? No, no! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
[Lays down a dagger.]
What if it be a poison which the friar Subtly hath minist'red to have me dead, Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored Because he married me before to Romeo? I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not, For he hath still been tried a holy man. How if, when I am laid into the tomb, I wake before the time that Romeo Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point! Shall I not then be stifled in the vault, To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in, And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes? Or, if I live, is it not very like The horrible conceit of death and night, Together with the terror of the place—As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
8 behovefulexpedient 8 statepomp 15 faintcausing faintness 25 minist'redprovided 29 stillalways 29 triedproved 37 conceitthought
Where for this many hundred years the bones Of all my buried ancestors are packed; Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth, Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say, At some hours in the night spirits resort—Alack, alack, is it not like that I, So early waking—what with loathsome smells, And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth, That living mortals, hearing them, run mad—O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught, Environèd with all these hideous fears, And madly play with my forefathers' joints, And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud, And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains? O, look! Methinks I see my cousin's ghost Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay! Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, I drink to thee.
[She falls upon her bed within the curtains.]
[Scene 4. Hall in Capulet's house.]
Enter Lady of the House and Nurse.
Lady Capulet.Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
Nurse.They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Enter old Capulet.
Capulet.Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed, The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
42 green in earthnewly entombed 47 mandrakesplant with forked root, resembling the human body (supposed to shriek when uprooted and drive the hearer mad) 49 distraughtdriven mad 4.4.2 pastrypastry cook's room
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica; Spare not for cost.
Nurse.Go, you cotquean, go, Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick tomorrow For this night's watching.
Capulet.No, not a whit. What, I have watched ere now All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
Lady Capulet.Ay, you have been a mouse hunt in your time; But I will watch you from such watching now.
Exit Lady and Nurse.
Capulet.A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Enter three or four[Fellows] with spits andlogs and baskets.
Now, fellow,
What is there?
First Fellow.Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
Capulet.Make haste, make haste. [Exit first Fellow.] Sirrah, fetch drier logs. Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
Second Fellow.I have a head, sir, that will find out logs And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Capulet.Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha! Thou shalt be loggerhead. [Exit second Fellow,with the others.] Good faith, 'tis day. The County will be here with music straight, For so he said he would. Play music.
5 baked meatsmeat pies 5 Angelica(the Nurse's name) 6 cotqueanman who does woman's work 8 watchingstaying awake 11 mouse huntnight prowler, woman chaser 13 A jealous hoodi.e., you wear the cap of a jealous person 18 will find out logshas an affinity for logs (i.e., is wooden also) 20 Massby the Mass 20 whoresonrascal 21 loggerheadblockhead
I hear him near.
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
Enter Nurse.
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up. I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste, Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already: Make haste, I say. [Exit.]
[Scene 5. Juliet's chamber.]
Nurse. Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I war- rant her, she. Why, lamb! Why, lady! Fie, you slugabed. Why, love, I say! Madam; Sweetheart! Why, bride! What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now; Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant, The County Paris hath set up his rest That you shall rest but little. God forgive me! Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep! I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam! Ay, let the County take you in your bed; He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
[Draws aside the curtains.]
What, dressed, and in your clothes, and down again? I must needs wake you. Lady! Lady! Lady! Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
4.5.1 Nurse(at the conclusion of the last scene the nurse presumably did not go offstage but remained on the forestage, and after Capulet's departure she now walks to the rear to open the curtains, revealing Juliet) 1 Fastfast asleep 2 slugabedsleepyhead 4 pennyworthssmall portions (i.e., short naps) 6 set up his restfirmly resolved (with bawdy suggestion of having a lance in readiness) 12 downgone back to bed
O weraday that ever I was born! Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! My lady!
[Enter Mother.]
Lady Capulet.What noise is here?
Nurse.O lamentable day!
Lady Capulet.What is the matter?
Nurse.Look, look! O heavy day!
Lady Capulet.O me, O me! My child, my only life! Revive, look up, or I will die with thee! Help, help! Call help.
Enter Father.
Capulet.For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
Nurse.She's dead, deceased; she's dead, alack the day!
Lady Capulet.Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Capulet.Ha! Let me see her. Out alas! She's cold, Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff; Life and these lips have long been separated. Death lies on her like an untimely frost. Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Nurse.O lamentable day!
Lady Capulet.O woeful time!
Capulet.Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail, Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak. Enter Friar[Lawrence] and the County[Paris,with Musicians].
Friar.Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Capulet.Ready to go, but never to return.
15 weradaywelladay, alas 16 aqua vitaespirits
O son, the night before thy wedding day Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies, Flower as she was, deflowerèd by him. Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir; My daughter he hath wedded. I will die And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
Paris.Have I thought, love, to see this morning's face, And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Lady Capulet.Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day! Most miserable hour that e'er time saw In lasting labor of his pilgrimage! But one, poor one, one poor and loving child, But one thing to rejoice and solace in, And cruel Death hath catched it from my sight.
Nurse.O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day! Most lamentable day, most woeful day That ever ever I did yet behold! O day, O day, O day! O hateful day! Never was seen so black a day as this. O woeful day! O woeful day!
Paris.Beguiled, divorcèd, wrongèd, spited, slain! Most detestable Death, by thee beguiled, By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown. O love! O life!—not life, but love in death!
Capulet.Despised, distressèd, hated, martyred, killed! Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now To murder, murder our solemnity? O child, O child! My soul, and not my child! Dead art thou—alack, my child is dead, And with my child my joys are burièd!
Friar.Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not In these confusions. Heaven and yourself Had part in this fair maid—now heaven hath all, And all the better is it for the maid.
60 Uncomfortablediscomforting
Your part in her you could not keep from death, But heaven keeps his part in eternal life. The most you sought was her promotion, For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced; And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself? O, in this love, you love your child so ill That you run mad, seeing that she is well. She's not well married that lives married long, But she's best married that dies married young. Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary On this fair corse, and, as the custom is, And in her best array bear her to church; For though fond nature bids us all lament, Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
Capulet.All things that we ordainèd festival Turn from their office to black funeral—Our instruments to melancholy bells, Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast; Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change; Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse; And all things change them to the contrary.
Friar.Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him; And go, Sir Paris. Everyone prepare To follow this fair corse unto her grave. The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill; Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Exeunt[casting rosemary on her and shutting the curtains].
Manet[the Nurse with Musicians].
First Musician.Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
Nurse.Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up! For well you know this is a pitiful case. [Exit.]
76 welli.e., in blessed condition, in heaven 79 rosemaryan evergreen, signifying remembrance 82 fond naturefoolish human nature 94 low'rfrown 95 s.d. Manetremains (Latin) 99 case(1) situation (2) instrument case
First Musician.Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Enter[Peter].
Peter.Musicians, O, musicians, "Heart's ease," "Heart's ease"! O, and you will have me live, play "Heart's ease."
First Musician.Why "Heart's ease"?
Peter.O, musicians, because my heart itself plays "My heart is full." O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
First Musician.Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
Peter.You will not then?
First Musician.No.
Peter.I will then give it you soundly.
First Musician.What will you give us?
Peter.No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the minstrel.
First Musician.Then will I give you the serving-creature.
Peter.Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate. I will carry no crotchets. I'll reyou, I'll fa you. Do you note me?
First Musician.And you reus and faus, you note us.
Second Musician.Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit. Then have at you with my wit!
107 dumpsad tune 115 gleekgibe 116 give youcall you 120 carryendure 120 crotchets(1) whims (2) quarter notes 120-21 re . . . fa(musical notes, but used perhaps with puns on "ray," or "bewray" ["befoul"], and "fay" ["polish"]; see H. Kökeritz, Shakespeare's Pronunciation,pp. 105-06) 121 noteunderstand 122-23 note usset us to music 125 put outset out, display
Peter.I will dry-beat you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
"When griping grief the heart doth wound, And doleful dumps the mind oppress, Then music with her silver sound"—Why "silver sound"? Why "music with her silver sound"? What say you, Simon Catling?
First Musician.Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Peter.Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
Second Musician.I say "silver sound" because mu- sicians sound for silver.
Peter.Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Third Musician.Faith, I know not what to say.
Peter.O, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is "music with her silver sound" be- cause musicians have no gold for sounding.
"Then music with her silver sound With speedy help doth lend redress." Exit.
First Musician.What a pestilent knave is this same!
Second Musician.Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.
Exit[with others].
128-30 When . . . sound(the song is from Richard Edwards' "In Commendation of Music," in The Paradise of Dainty Devices,1576) 132 Catlingcatgut, a lute string 135 Rebecka three-stringed fiddle 138 Soundpostpeg that gives internal support to a violin 140 cry you mercybeg your pardon
[ACT 5
Scene 1. Mantua. A street.]
Enter Romeo.
Romeo.If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep, My dreams presage some joyful news at hand. My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne, And all this day an unaccustomed spirit Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. I dreamt my lady came and found me dead (Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!) And breathed such life with kisses in my lips That I revived and was an emperor. Ah me! How sweet is love itself possessed, When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
Enter Romeo's Man[Balthasar, booted].
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar? Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar? How doth my lady? Is my father well? How fares my Juliet? That I ask again, For nothing can be ill if she be well.
Man.Then she is well, and nothing can be ill. Her body sleeps in Capel's monument, And her immortal part with angels lives.
5.1.1 flatteringillusory 3 bosom's lordi.e., heart 11 shadowsdreams 18 monumenttomb
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault And presently took post to tell it you. O, pardon me for bringing these ill news, Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Romeo.Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars! Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper And hire post horses. I will hence tonight.
Man.I do beseech you, sir, have patience. Your looks are pale and wild and do import Some misadventure.
Romeo.Tush, thou art deceived. Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do. Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Man.No, my good lord.
Romeo.No matter. Get thee gone. And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
Exit[Balthasar].
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight. Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift To enter in the thoughts of desperate men! I do remember an apothecary, And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows, Culling of simples. Meager were his looks, Sharp misery had worn him to the bones; And in his needy shop a tortoise hung, An alligator stuffed, and other skins Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves A beggarly account of empty boxes, Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds, Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses Were thinly scatterèd, to make up a show. Noting this penury, to myself I said,
21 postpost horses 23 officeduty 28 importsuggest 39 weedsclothes 39 overwhelmingoverhanging 40 Culling of simplescollecting medicinal herbs 45 accountnumber 47 cakes of rosespressed rose petals (for perfume)
"And if a man did need a poison now Whose sale is present death in Mantua, Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him." O, this same thought did but forerun my need, And this same needy man must sell it me. As I remember, this should be the house. Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! Apothecary!
[Enter Apothecary.]
Apothecary.Who calls so loud?
Romeo.Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor. Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear As will disperse itself through all the veins That the life-weary taker may fall dead, And that the trunk may be discharged of breath As violently as hasty powder fired Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Apothecary.Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law Is death to any he that utters them.
Romeo.Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks, Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes, Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back: The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law; The world affords no law to make thee rich; Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Apothecary.My poverty but not my will consents.
Romeo.I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
Apothecary.Put this in any liquid thing you will And drink it off, and if you had the strength Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
52 caitiffmiserable 60 soon-speeding gearfast-working stuff 63 trunkbody 67 uttersdispenses 70 starvethstand starving
Romeo.There is thy gold—worse poison to men's souls, Doing more murder in this loathsome world, Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell. I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none. Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh. Come, cordial and not poison, go with me To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
Exeunt.
[Scene 2. Friar Lawrence's cell.]
Enter Friar John to Friar Lawrence.
John.Holy Franciscan father, brother, ho!
Enter[Friar] Lawrence.
Lawrence.This same should be the voice of Friar John. Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo? Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
John.Going to find a barefoot brother out, One of our order, to associate me Here in this city visiting the sick, And finding him, the searchers of the town, Suspecting that we both were in a house Where the infectious pestilence did reign, Sealed up the doors, and would not let us forth, So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.
Lawrence.Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
John.I could not send it—here it is again—Nor get a messenger to bring it thee, So fearful were they of infection.
85 cordialrestorative 5.2.6 associateaccompany 8 searchershealth officers
Lawrence.Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood, The letter was not nice, but full of charge, Of dear import; and the neglecting it May do much danger. Friar John, go hence, Get me an iron crow and bring it straight Unto my cell.
John.Brother, I'll go and bring it thee. Exit.
Lawrence.Now must I to the monument alone. Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake. She will beshrew me much that Romeo Hath had no notice of these accidents; But I will write again to Mantua, And keep her at my cell till Romeo come—
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb! Exit.
[Scene 3. A churchyard; in it a monument belonging to the Capulets.]
Enter Paris and his Page[with flowers and sweet water].
Paris.Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof. Yet put it out, for I would not be seen. Under yond yew trees lay thee all along, Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground. So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread (Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves) But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me, As signal that thou hearest something approach. Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Page.[Aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
17 brotherhoodreligious order 18 nicetrivial 18 chargeimportance 21 crowcrowbar 25 beshrewblame 26 accidentshappenings 5.3.3 lay thee all alonglie at full length
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.
[Retires.]
Paris.Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew (O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones) Which with sweet water nightly I will dew; Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans. The obsequies that I for thee will keep Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
Whistle Boy.
The boy gives warning something doth approach. What cursèd foot wanders this way tonight To cross my obsequies and true love's rite? What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
[Retires.]
Enter Romeo,[and Balthasar with a torch, a mattock,and a crow of iron].
Romeo.Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron. Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning See thou deliver it to my lord and father. Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee, Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof And do not interrupt me in my course. Why I descend into this bed of death Is partly to behold my lady's face, But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger A precious ring—a ring that I must use. In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone. But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry In what I farther shall intend to do, By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs. The time and my intents are savage-wild, More fierce and more inexorable far Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
11 adventurerisk it 14 sweetperfumed 20 crossinterrupt 21 Mufflehide 32 dear employmentimportant business 33 jealouscurious
Balthasar.I will be gone, sir, and not trouble ye.
Romeo.So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that. Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Balthasar.[Aside] For all this same, I'll hide me here- about. His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt. [Retires.]
Romeo.Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death, Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth, Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open, And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
[Romeo opens the tomb.]
Paris.This is that banished haughty Montague That murd'red my love's cousin—with which grief It is supposed the fair creature died—And here is come to do some villainous shame To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him. Stop thy unhallowèd toil, vile Montague! Can vengeance be pursued further than death? Condemnèd villain, I do apprehend thee. Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
Romeo.I must indeed; and therefore came I hither. Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man. Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone; Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth, Put not another sin upon my head By urging me to fury. O, be gone! By heaven, I love thee better than myself, For I come hither armed against myself. Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
Paris.I do defy thy conjurations. And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Romeo.Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
[They fight.]
44 doubtsuspect 45 mawstomach 48 in despiteto spite you 68 conjurationssolemn charges
Page.O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
[Exit. Paris falls.]
Paris.O, I am slain! If thou be merciful, Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet. [Dies.]
Romeo.In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face. Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris! What said my man when my betossèd soul Did not attend him as we rode? I think He told me Paris should have married Juliet. Said he not so, or did I dream it so? Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet, To think it was so? O, give me thy hand, One writ with me in sour misfortune's book! I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave. A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth, For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes This vault a feasting presence full of light. Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.
[Lays him in the tomb.]
How oft when men are at the point of death Have they been merry! Which their keepers call A lightning before death. O, how may I Call this a lightning? O my love, my wife! Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath, Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty. Thou art not conquered. Beauty's ensign yet Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks, And death's pale flag is not advancèd there. Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet? O, what more favor can I do to thee Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain To sunder his that was thine enemy? Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet, Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
77 attendgive attention to 84 lanthornlantern (a windowed erection on the top of a dome or room to admit light) 86 feasting presencefestive presence chamber 89 keepersjailers 94 ensignbanner
And that the lean abhorrèd monster keeps Thee here in dark to be his paramour? For fear of that I still will stay with thee And never from this pallet of dim night Depart again. Here, here will I remain With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here Will I set up my everlasting rest And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last! Arms, take your last embrace! And, lips, O you The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss A dateless bargain to engrossing death! Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavory guide! Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark! Here's to my love! [Drinks.] O true apothecary! Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. [Falls.]
Enter Friar[Lawrence], with lanthorn, crow, and spade.
Friar.Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonight Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Balthasar.Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Friar.Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend, What torch is yond that vainly lends his light To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern, It burneth in the Capels' monument.
Balthasar.It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master, One that you love.
Friar.Who is it?
Balthasar.Romeo.
Friar.How long hath he been there?
115 datelesseternal 115 engrossingall-buying, all-encompassing 116 conductguide 117 desperate piloti.e., himself 121 speedhelp 122 stumbled(a bad omen)
Balthasar.Full half an hour.
Friar.Go with me to the vault.
Balthasar.I dare not, sir. My master knows not but I am gone hence, And fearfully did menace me with death If I did stay to look on his intents.
Friar.Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me. O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
Balthasar.As I did sleep under this yew tree here, I dreamt my master and another fought, And that my master slew him.
Friar.Romeo! Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains The stony entrance of this sepulcher? What mean these masterless and gory swords To lie discolored by this place of peace?
[Enters the tomb.]
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too? And steeped in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour Is guilty of this lamentable chance! The lady stirs. [Juliet rises.]
Juliet.O comfortable friar! Where is my lord? I do remember well where I should be, And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
Friar.I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep. A greater power than we can contradict Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away. Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead; And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee Among a sisterhood of holy nuns. Stay not to question, for the watch is coming. Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
136 unthriftyunlucky 145 unkindunnatural 148 comfortablecomforting
Juliet.Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
Exit[Friar].
What's here? A cup, closed in my truelove's hand? Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end. O churl! Drunk all, and left no friendly drop To help me after? I will kiss thy lips. Haply some poison yet doth hang on them To make me die with a restorative. [Kisses him.] Thy lips are warm!
Chief Watchman.[Within] Lead, boy. Which way?
Juliet.Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger! [Snatches Romeo's dagger.] This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.
[She stabs herself and falls.]
Enter[Paris'] Boy and Watch.
Boy.This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
Chief Watchman.The ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard. Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
[Exeunt some of the Watch.]
Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain; And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead, Who here hath lain this two days burièd. Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets; Raise up the Montagues; some others search.
[Exeunt others of the Watch.]
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie, But the true ground of all these piteous woes We cannot without circumstance descry.
Enter[some of the Watch, with] Romeo's Man[Balthasar].
Second Watchman.Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
162 timelessuntimely 163 churlrude fellow 169 happyopportune 180 groundcause 181 circumstancedetails
Chief Watchman.Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Enter Friar[Lawrence] and another Watchman.
Third Watchman.Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps. We took this mattock and this spade from him As he was coming from this churchyard's side.
Chief Watchman.A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
Enter the Prince[and Attendants].
Prince.What misadventure is so early up, That calls our person from our morning rest?
Enter Capulet and his Wife[with others].
Capulet.What should it be, that is so shrieked abroad?
Lady Capulet.O, the people in the street cry "Romeo," Some "Juliet," and some "Paris"; and all run With open outcry toward our monument.
Prince.What fear is this which startles in your ears?
Chief Watchman.Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain; And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before, Warm and new killed.
Prince.Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Chief Watchman.Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeo's man, With instruments upon them fit to open These dead men's tombs.
Capulet.O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds! This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house Is empty on the back of Montague, And it missheathèd in my daughter's bosom!
203 his houseits sheath
Lady Capulet.O me, this sight of death is as a bell That warns my old age to a sepulcher.
Enter Montague[and others]
Prince.Come, Montague; for thou art early up To see thy son and heir more early down.
Montague.Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight! Grief of my son's exile hath stopped her breath. What further woe conspires against mine age?
Prince.Look, and thou shalt see.
Montague.O thou untaught! What manners is in this, To press before thy father to a grave?
Prince.Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while, Till we can clear these ambiguities And know their spring, their head, their true descent; And then will I general of your woes And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear, And let mischance be slave to patience. Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
Friar.I am the greatest, able to do least, Yet most suspected, as the time and place Doth make against me, of this direful murder; And here I stand, both to impeach and purge Myself condemnèd and myself excused.
Prince.Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
Friar.I will be brief, for my short date of breath Is not so long as is a tedious tale. Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet; And she, there dead, that's Romeo's faithful wife. I married them; and their stol'n marriage day Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death Banished the new-made bridegroom from this city;
216 the mouth of outragethese violent cries 219 general of your woesleader in your sorrowing 226 impeach and purgemake charges and exonerate 229 date of breathterm of life
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined. You, to remove that siege of grief from her, Betrothed and would have married her perforce To County Paris. Then comes she to me And with wild looks bid me devise some mean To rid her from this second marriage, Or in my cell there would she kill herself. Then gave I her (so tutored by my art) A sleeping potion; which so took effect As I intended, for it wrought on her The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo That he should hither come as this dire night To help to take her from her borrowed grave, Being the time the potion's force should cease. But he which bore my letter, Friar John, Was stayed by accident, and yesternight Returned my letter back. Then all alone At the prefixèd hour of her waking Came I to take her from her kindred's vault; Meaning to keep her closely at my cell Till I conveniently could send to Romeo. But when I came, some minute ere the time Of her awakening, here untimely lay The noble Paris and true Romeo dead. She wakes; and I entreated her come forth And bear this work of heaven with patience; But then a noise did scare me from the tomb, And she, too desperate, would not go with me, But, as it seems, did violence on herself. All this I know, and to the marriage Her nurse is privy; and if aught in this Miscarried by my fault, let my old life Be sacrificed some hour before his time Unto the rigor of severest law.
Prince.We still have known thee for a holy man. Where's Romeo's man? What can he say to this?
Balthasar.I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
247 ason 255 closelyhidden 266 privyaccessory 270 stillalways
And then in post he came from Mantua To this same place, to this same monument. This letter he early bid me give his father, And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault, If I departed not and left him there.
Prince.Give me the letter. I will look on it. Where is the County's page that raised the watch? Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Boy.He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave; And bid me stand aloof, and so I did. Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb; And by and by my master drew on him; And then I ran away to call the watch.
Prince.This letter doth make good the friar's words, Their course of love, the tidings of her death; And here he writes that he did buy a poison Of a poor apothecary and therewithal Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet. Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montague, See what a scourge is laid upon your hate, That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love. And I, for winking at your discords, too, Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.
Capulet.O brother Montague, give me thy hand. This is my daughter's jointure, for no more Can I demand.
Montague.But I can give thee more; For I will raise her statue in pure gold, That whiles Verona by that name is known, There shall no figure at such rate be set As that of true and faithful Juliet.
Capulet.As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie—Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
280 made your masterwas your master doing 284 by and bysoon 289 therewithaltherewith 294 winking atclosing eyes to 295 bracepair (i.e., Mercutio and Paris) 297 jointuremarriage settlement 301 ratevalue
Prince.A glooming peace this morning with it brings. The sun for sorrow will not show his head. Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things; Some shall be pardoned, and some punishèd; For never was a story of more woe Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
[Exeunt omnes.]